I guess good morning.
Morning, Steven. Morning Haley.
Uh, good morning. Good Morning. Nice to see you.
It's been a while, council.
Right? Well, look, welcome.
Um, all of you, uh, we have, um,
got your written submission, so you can take that as read,
but I think you have a,
a brief PowerPoint by the lot of it. Uh,
Look, look, we, um, we circulated that
as notes rather than it's PowerPoint.
Just, um, just in case the technology doesn't go through,
just the way of framing the context for what we're,
what we're seeking to in the submission.
So perhaps if I can just, um, fire into what I,
What, what I'll say to you is we've got 10 minutes, um,
and, uh, if you leave us time
for questions, we always like that.
I'll give you a call at say,
four minutes to go if you're still going.
But, um, over to you that,
That should be fine.
Um, Kota, good morning. Um, my name's Steven Lamb.
I'm the policy manager at Bay in Regional Council.
Uh, with me online is Haley Sheridan, our legal counsel,
and John John Peters, who is our hard master based toga.
Um, looking after all this,
the boat transiting out the Port Taronga.
So our submission, I, this is pretty, um, simple one.
It's got like one point to it really, which is
around the infringements, um, size of the infringement fees.
So Clauses 91
of the bill talks about increasing the size of the infringement fees.
Um, the background to this, the regional impact statement.
Uh, so the regulatory impact statements, um,
cabinet material, et cetera, all talks about
or makes reference to bylaws, um, in terms
of the increasing infringements.
Um, and so we are just asking that it's made,
you know, clear that these infringement increases
do apply to bylaws.
So the position is that the increases being applied
to section two, that's 201 also apply to 33.
Um, oh,
Continue on. Carry, carry
on, Karen.
Yep. Um, so, so Justin, just go over the page.
Um, title infringement fees, legislation.
Um, these are obviously set by order and counsel.
Um, um, the navigation bylaws are referenced twice in the
act, um, section 33 oh and 2, 201.
Um, but this, the amendment bill only applies to 201,
and so we are seeking that it applies to both.
Um, we have been look working on infringement fees
with the Ministry of Transport.
They're very clear that only three, three oh can be applied.
So we can only go through that, that route.
Um, and so therefore we're seeking that in
that increase there.
Just also noting that there are already
guardrails in place around this.
Um, any, any sort of innocence overreach,
local government in terms of increasing fees
disproportionately, um, are modified by the fact
that we have to go through the military
transport and the PCO.
So that's the, are in place just in terms of our context
and the context slide.
So we put in an exclusion zone around more TT island.
As for allowed brief, you'll recall the MB
rent ran around there.
Mm-hmm. Um, the exclusion zone is prevent that.
So significant economic, environmental, and cultural damage.
Um, we recently review the bylaw, um, around
that exclusion zone and sort an increase infringement fee.
And we were, we were pulled back
to the maximum is a, is a thousand dollars.
You can imagine the a thousand dollars
for international shipping firm is a
small drop in a very large bucket.
Um, the, the slide, which is titled ongoing risk just talks.
It's, um, two things there.
One is the, um, the, the data showing the,
the la the latest, um, incursion into the exclusion zone.
Um, it's,
and on the right hand side, there's a map of the,
the current ex exclusion zone,
but we're actually even having to increase that, uh,
because a large ship was found sneaking down
inside Titi Island.
So you know that this is a very large ship ending up sort
of a few hundred meters off, off the island.
So it shows that there's an ongoing risk here.
Um, and we recognize
that infringement fees are only one part of the puzzle,
but they're an important part.
So just in the conclusion, um, that that capping
of the infringement fees at a thousand dollars is not
appropriate for all bylaw situations.
Clearly it is for some,
and clearly, you know, um, infringement fees
for not wearing life jackets will
always remain at that lower end.
But, but we don't have any access
to a high end infringement.
Um, so that's, our submission is
effecting on that, that one point.
But the increase in fees, which has been being applied
through Section 201 should also be applied through 33 0.
Uh, 33. Oh
Look, thanks Steven.
Um, on the, um, was
what we've got printed out is very, very small.
So actually that, that map that you were referring
to would actually be quite useful.
If you, if you can put that on the screen,
it would be quite useful just to see that, uh,
even if only briefly to see,
because I, I I take it what you're saying basically is that
for, uh, ships, they're basically taking some
shortcuts. Yes.
Because it's, it's, Yeah, it's a shortcut
through an exclusion zone, which puts them at risk. Yeah.
And, and it is infrequent,
but it is high risk, you know, in terms of,
you know, what could occur here.
Um, or
Yeah. And just
before I go to Cam, can I just ask how many,
how many areas exclusion zones do you have around the,
around your jurisdiction?
It's just this one. Just this one? Oh, just that one.
Okay. Yeah. There, there are, there are three reef systems
in there, um, and we're adding more TD Island to it
because of the, the, the recent instance where, like I say
it shipped, took a shortcut
between the exclusion zone and the island.
Um, again, putting a, a quite significant risk.
Yeah. Is that, and is that what the arena did? No.
Did something just lead different? Okay.
It, it, well, it was taking a shortcut.
There was no exclusions at the time. It took a shortcut.
John, John, you might be able to speak briefly on that. Yes,
That's correct. Correct. It was
taking a shortcut north of it,
whereas the one we, we, uh, Steven referring to is the one,
it went south of that exclusion zone.
Right. Okay. Can, thank you. Um, nice to see you all.
Uh, yeah. John, John, um, question I have, is this,
this vessel coming close to Morty Island?
Was that prior to the exclusion zone being put in place?
No. So, uh, Steven, do you wanna speak to that?
Yeah, so the exclusion zone was put in place.
Um, and so this ship said, well, there's a gap
between the exclusion zone and Morty Island.
So on that map, it
Was prior to the Morty Island North exclusion.
Oh, yes. Yeah. Prior to that. Yeah.
So we are, we are adding that in now. Yeah.
So there was an action. So the, the ship went in there,
there was no fine, you could have done anyway
because it was already an exclusion zone.
Right. Yeah. The next question I have, the, the,
the situation, um, you've got in your slides,
which are very small, but I think we can sort of get it.
Um, the, they're cutting in really, like they're,
they're not, they're not right up by, you know,
they're out in a hundred meters of water.
They're not, they're a mile and nearly mile off.
They're not exactly, you know,
doing the arena firing straight outta reef.
What sort of limit, if you had an upper limit of 10,000,
what sort of limit would you be proposing
to put in on someone who just came right, just
inside the exclusion zone as these maps layout?
Like, would you be going for the maximum
fine for every infringement?
Like if someone came in within 50 meters,
got a crab pot tangled around their prop? Um,
Yeah, you know, I,
I think this becomes a de a degree issue, doesn't it?
Like if someone's in 10, you know, a hundred meters,
someone's in 500 meters, um, we,
what we would probably do is,
Sorry if we could jump in here.
The, um, exclusions zone only applies
to vessels over 500 gross tons.
It's not ordinary recreational boats.
No, I, I, I completely understand that.
Um, but my question is, how, like,
is there gonna be a degree, you've said 10,000, you know,
it's not a, it's a drop in the
bucket for a large shipping company.
Would you be going 10,000 for any, uh,
entrance into the exclusion zone,
or would you be trying to get that as you know, um,
you know, the closer you get, the higher you get.
Like the closer you get to the, the reef system,
brewers astral lab,
you're just gonna go 10 grand straight away from Yep.
Yeah. Okay.
Um, and then the, the, yeah. Oh no, probably,
I think it's probably worth saying that,
that that's our start point.
This is what we have to discuss with the Ministry
of Transport and PCO.
Um, you know, if, if, if a gradation is, is seen
as an proper way of doing it, that's fine.
Yep. Cool. Some of these, um, last question is some
of these, uh, the bylaw breaches that you've shown, uh,
are going through multiple, like going through, um,
is it brewers op powder
and as brief exclusion zones,
could you give a 30,000 if you were to get to 10 grand?
Would you give one fine for each
reef exclusion zone entrance?
I, I think we'd be saying that
Could, yeah.
Um, but we would have a discretion in that case as
to whether we just issue one
or whether we issue two or three.
Another final question, uh, final line of questioning.
How do you monitor this?
Are you gonna do it by the tracking system,
or are you gonna have a, uh, person on the ground out there?
Well, on the float out there,
We have a, we have a tracking system, which is, um,
as soon as somebody enters that circle, we get a ping.
Uh, my team, I, we get an email so we know who it is
and we get a picture of, of the exact aggregation
of the vessel when she, uh, came into the exclusions of.
Okay. Okay. Thank you. Any other questions, Tracy?
Um, thank you. Um, Cameron just asked most
of my questions, but I, um, do you have any,
can you fill us in on why, why, um, section three,
three oh hasn't been included originally?
Were there any feedback
to you when you've made your inquiries?
Uh, we only came up against this when we were seeking the
order and council for infringement fees
for the navigation safety bylaw, um, where we said,
can we use section 200, 201, um,
the seek a higher infringement fee,
and the ministry transport said no,
it wasn't available to us.
So, um, it's their process.
Um, and so that, that's where we got stuck really.
So they didn't give you any feedback as into why?
Oh, when and the preparation of this omnibus
that they didn't see that that was, uh, um,
something that needed to be fixed from their end?
To be honest, we weren't aware that this,
this process was occurring until the last minute.
So they, no one told us that, um, this was being considered.
And you mentioned, um, NCTA in terms of, um,
access, well managing access to this fee.
So Maritime New Zealand, what role would they play
in any kind of consultation
or any, um, management of access to the fee?
Yeah, so, um, the formal process is Ministry, transport
and Boundary Council Office.
Um, but Maritime New Zealand has, we're starting discussions
with them around the whole, um, compliance enforcement o
of maritime matters between regional councils,
maritime New Zealand, and, and MOT.
Um, so if, if this was, um, applied
and it became the potential for higher fees,
I think there would need to be some more kind of, um,
collective discussion around about how they get, you know,
guidance for how those get set
and Maritime Museum would come to that point.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you all, really appreciate that.
Um, you've given us some, uh, food for thought.
We've got all the officials there,
so there'd be a few questions that I'm sure that they're,
um, noting down to, uh, uh, to give us some advice on.
Cool. And, and we're happy to provide
further information to provide,
Sorry, say again.
We're happy to provide further in
information that's required.
No, thank you. Really appreciate
that, and good to see you again.
Great. Nice, nice. See you as well. Yeah. Cool. Thank you.
Right. That takes us on to
the Financial Services Federation.
Hello.
Morning. Hi, Lynn.
Good morning. Thanks, Mr.
Chairman. Nice to see you.
I just tell you, we've got, we've got, um, uh,
committee all around the table.
We've got, um, officials, uh, listening as well.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
You can take your submission as read.
Um, but if you want to, um, say what you wanna do, highlight
what you want to highlight, I'll give you a call.
When's about four minutes to go if you have, uh,
if you have not already finished, um, uh, your presenting,
uh, just so you know, we'd like asking questions,
so in your hands way you go.
Thanks very much. Um, I should be fine
before the four minute bill.
'cause, uh, basically there's only a couple of things
that I really want to highlight.
So thanks for the opportunity
for the Financial Services
Federation to present to you today.
Um, as you can see from the submission,
we are the industry body representing specialist
lenders operating in New Zealand.
Um, and our members collectively have relationships
with 1.7 million New Zealand consumers
and businesses who choose to deal
with the specialist lending sector.
Um, so we are very supportive of the purpose of the bill
to modernize the transport regulatory system, particularly
to enable digital service alternatives
to physical licenses and labels.
Um, we'd like to see the bill allow for the fact that
specifically, um, actually allow for the fact that, um,
uh, road user charges
and registration labels are also included in the
digitization process.
And the reason for that is
that our membership includes the major fleet leasing
providers operating in New Zealand.
They have well over a hundred thousand vehicles
operating on New Zealand roads.
Um, and the process for them
to manually provide re-licensing labels for the users
of each of these vehicles every year is just, it's manual,
it's cumbersome, it's labor intensive.
Um, it's fraught with danger in terms of the,
the labels getting lost
and not reaching the, the person that they need to, um,
in a timely manner before the existing label expires.
Um, and it's just, yeah, it's, it's just antiquated
and absolutely needs
to be included in the digitization process.
So we'd like to see that specifically written into the bill.
Um, there obviously needs
to also be serious consideration about how the,
the digitization process will be funded.
Um, but from our perspective, it's not a question
of if digitization of labels and licenses should be enabled,
but a question of when and the sooner the better.
Um, we'd like very much round members to be part of
that discussion on the design of the solutions to ensure
that they will deliver the efficiencies
that the bill's trying to enable.
Um, and the other point that we wanted
to highlight from our submission was around, um,
our supportive, uh, support for clause 55 of the bill
that clarifies that the person
to whom a photographic image relates may access the image
when accessing and using their electronic driver's license.
Mm-hmm. Um, that clarification also includes the fact
that the NZTA may give a third party access
to photographic images of driver license holders
for the purposes of creating
and maintaining an electronic register with the consent
of the person to whom the photographic image relates.
Um, it's a fact
that the New Zealand driver's license is the primary means
of identification for most people for a ML purposes.
Um, it is not simply a licensed driver motor vehicle
for the purposes of accessing any kind of financial service.
The driver's license is
provided as proof of identity
to meet a ML requirements, as I said.
So unfortunately, currently, the,
the physical driver's license is easy
for criminals to reproduce.
In order for them to act fraudulently, uh,
they obtain a genuine license holder's details
through nefarious means,
then they reproduce an entirely genuine looking license
with a photo of one of their associates rather than
the real license holder.
No biometric testing is going to identify
that the person holding the genuine looking license is not
the actual license holder.
All this testing will do is confirm
that the person proffering the license,
is the person whose photo appears on the fake license.
This then allows them
to impersonate a genuine license holder
to take out fraudulent loans in their name.
As our submission says, it's estimated that thousands
of New Zealanders are victims of identity theft annually,
and the resulting crimes may cost the New Zealand co economy
in excess of 200 million every year.
We believe that clause 55 of the bill allows access
to the driver's license photo database for the purposes
of identifying that the photo on the license being presented
matches the photo of the genuine license holder.
And this should be enabled, again, sooner rather than later
as it would eliminate identity fraud
and the costs to individuals
and businesses associated with that overnight.
We are not suggesting that access
to the photo database be opened up to everyone
because there are obviously privacy issues attached to that,
uh, that we should be concerned about.
But it makes sense that entities like credit reporting
agencies should be able to pro to access it,
to provide confirmation to financial services providers
and other relevant entities as part of their,
um, identification process.
So those were really the two main
points we wanted to highlight.
Um, I don't think I've reached the four minute mark yet,
but I'm happy to take questions.
Thanks, Lynn. You'd be very efficient.
We've got five and a bit minutes left,
so Right. Questions, Dan,
Thanks for your submission, Lynn.
Um, this is just more of a, a statement.
Um, so the digital road user charges is, is coming.
It's gonna be in a different piece of legislation, uh,
and I think hit the ground running, uh, in 2027.
We're very interested in that one too.
So yeah, definitely keeping an eye out for that one. Yeah.
Any other questions? Uh, I've got one,
which is just in terms of, there's a lot of questions
that you've, um, raised and good points you've raised,
which we'll look forward to getting
advice from officials on.
Uh, but the one I wanted to ask you about is just in terms
of the, the implementation of all of these things
and the education process, particularly
around the driver's license, because when I'm hearing you,
I'm kind of thinking, well, we should be then encouraging
people to, if it's a, if you've got a digital license
to actually go and periodically check that your, um,
you know, the photo on your license is you,
Is that Yeah, that would be ideal.
Um, 'cause it, unfortunately at the moment, the only,
the only way somebody knows
that their identity is being stolen is essentially when,
when the fraudulent loan attached to their name, um,
becomes, you know, it goes into default.
And, and so then enforcement action against the, the person
who hasn't taken out the loan starts.
And that's the first time they become aware of the fact
that their identity's been stolen.
So the ability for people to be able to check, um,
that their, that their digital driver's license still holds
their valid photo, um, would be very helpful.
And yeah, I mean, it's like anything, any changes require
a bit of an education process.
And I, and I see, you know, certainly our members have a,
a role to play in that when they're speaking
with customers at the loan application stage
or when they're setting up, um, a leasing arrangement
with a customer around, um, you know, um,
advising customers that perhaps they,
they should actually check that, that the photo, um,
is genuine and is genuinely of them.
Um, because yeah, I mean, although, um, lenders
and credit reporting agencies are very sympathetic
to people who've lost, who've had their identity stolen
and will do whatever they can to repair their credit rating,
um, you know, it's still a process that people have to go
through to, to get back to a point where they, that
that fraudulent loan doesn't sit against their
name. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Look, really appreciate that.
I don't see any other questions,
but Lynn, thank you very much
and you've definitely given us some things to think about
and to ask questions to the officials on.
Thanks very much, Andy. Appreciate your time.
Thank you. Okay.
And now we go to, yeah, our transporting,
are they online?
Oh, there. Here, right. Okay. Right. Good. Welcome.
So again, we've got you, uh, for 10 minutes
and I'll give you that button when we are at, um,
four minutes to go if you have, uh,
not already finished, but in your hands.
Um, Mr.
Chair, good morning. Committee members, um,
it's a pleasure to be here with my colleague
and policy advisor, mark Stockdale today.
Uh, transporting New Zealand, as some of you may know,
is a national for Road Freight Association,
representing about 1200 members combined fleet
of 14,000 heavy vehicles
and approximately one fifth
of the road freight transport business industry.
We have noted, uh, for the committee's assistance that, uh,
our sort of brother association national road carriers have
not made a submission.
However, they have had the opportunity to review ours
and advised us he stay,
there's no disagreement on the recommendations made.
Um, our submission today is focused on three broad elements,
um, particularly, uh, the reference to, uh,
granting New Zealand Transport Agency broader powers
to close parts
of the State highway network due to safety concerns.
Uh, that's currently due to a sort of technical
or drafting gap, something
that they currently rely on New Zealand police to do.
And so in the event of a natural disaster
or other emergency, that's sometimes done retrospectively.
So it's submit that, that makes sense as an amendment.
Have, we have, um, submitted that amending that section to,
um, specifically direct the transport agency to consider
and appropriately manage the safety
and welfare of affected road users would be of assistance
to our members in those situations.
Um, part two of our submission,
probably the most substantive, is, uh, noting our support
for the proposed changes
to the transport service licensing scheme.
So our members as, um, the operators
of road freight businesses are the individuals
and companies who, um,
who have these transport services license particularly
good service licenses.
Um, and in our submission, we note, uh, the need
for a strong educational campaign that we'd be very happy
to support to update industry on these changes.
Uh, the need to ensure at least three months
of implementation notice, depending on when this bill is,
um, progressed into law.
I think it's currently scheduled to begin in, uh,
some point in April, but if there was a sufficient
notice, that would be a great help.
And also just noting,
although it would be, um, helpful if the committee was able
to, uh, recommend
or suggest that Ministry of Transport's wider review
of the transport license, uh,
transport service license scheme would be of assistance.
We think that there are certainly some reasonably minor
technical improvements in this legislation,
but we think that a broad review,
which we understand has been on the cards for some time,
would be of great assistance level the playing field,
and help us, um, help the industry, uh, get rid
of some operators who aren't meeting safety standards
and are potentially endangering all road users.
And finally, uh, New Zealand submits that the amendments,
uh, allowing New Zealand Transport Agency
to declare e mobility vehicles are not motor vehicles should
not proceed without complementary policy measures put in
place to protect all road users from increasingly powerful
electric vehicles, including scoters
and e skateboards that members may have seen
around my colleague Mark will briefly
speak to this recommendation.
Um, after I've addressed those first two points, um,
if I may, just in the interest of time, uh,
take the committee to paragraph 29 of our submission, um,
that talks about the, the new ability
that this would allow New Zealand Transport Agency to
immediately suspend transport service licenses.
So under the current scheme, um, a decision to suspend
or revoke a transport service license, which is the license
that allows, um, uh, companies
with operating vehicles over six ton to transport goods
before that can be revoked,
it's considered an adverse decision,
which requires 28 days of notice.
And as the regulatory impact statement notes,
that's a considerable length
of time in which a transport company that's, uh,
potentially operating dangerously
or with, um, unsafe equipment
or unsafe driving practices can continue to operate.
So we certainly support, um, the, uh, adoption
of a section that would allow NZTA to be more responsive.
Um, just one consideration
that we've noted in the submission there is that if this is
to be, uh, introduced, we just,
we've really welcomed some assurance from New Zealand
Transport Agency that this power would be activated, uh,
in particularly serious cases of systemic failure.
We'd note that as noticed,
as noted in the regulatory impact statement under the Land
Transport Act, is already the ability
of New Zealand Transport Agency to immediately suspend
transport service driver from operating in the event.
Um, that, uh, you know, they're, they're, um,
endangering public safety due to, for example,
driving fatigued, um, reaching speed limits.
Those other cases, the effect
of suspending a transport service license
would be quite significant.
Uh, there can be hundreds of vehicles, hundreds
of drivers operating under a transport service license.
And, um, the way that the new section is drafted says that,
um, the agency would've the ability to, um,
suspend immediately potentially suspend a transport service
license in the event of, you know, breaches of, uh,
dimension requirements or mass limits
and the act or the rules.
This would potentially lead to a situation where, um, NZTA,
uh, would have the ability under this legislation
to immediately suspend A TSL, uh, in the event
that it's the act of one particular driver,
in which case our member would.
Um, so the members of our,
the company would be informed of that.
And, uh, if they wanted to, uh, revoke that they need
to immediately apply to the district court
or make urgent submissions to NZTA.
So I think that, um, amending this provision to
specifically state that this section will only be used in
the case that, uh, the existing provisions in the land,
in the Land Transport Act are insufficient
or perhaps referring to the need for a proportional approach
to be taken, certainly in the event of systemic failures,
or when NZTA is looking at a transport service license
and saying, well, goodness, there are, you know,
big picture issues here that can't be addressed
by simply suspending a particular driver,
um, that would be appropriate.
But we think that, um, some, um, some additions
or protections, uh, as referred to in our submission.
We just under four minutes left. Yep. Sorry.
Um, hand mark to
Oh, okay. So just
on the, uh, e mobility devices,
which was Clause 51 of the bill.
Yeah. We've got some concerns around that, uh, particularly
as it's pro to increase the, uh,
maximum power from 300 watts currently to 2000 watts.
So you'll, you'll have more higher powered vehicles
that are not motor vehicles on the road.
And that means they don't have things
like headlights and tail lights.
And we get complaints from, uh,
our members about near misses between trucks
and these vice vulnerable road users
because of their small size and their liquor visibility.
And so our suggestion is
that the change in the bill shouldn't proceed
unless there's some complimentary policy measures, measures,
uh, such as, uh, enabling those devices
to use cycle only lanes, which they can't at the moment.
They can use shared paths, but not cycle only lanes.
We think that they should also contribute directly to a CC
because a CC claims for these devices are rising.
Uh, and that could be done
through imposing a one-off levy at the point of import.
So it's just a one-off levy, not an ongoing thing.
Um, and also that those devices have speed limits
actually set by the factory,
and that could be evidenced by, uh, a certificate
provided by the importer at the point of import.
Thank You. Uh, questions. I just have a go on.
Yeah, I mean, um, thank you very much for all your points.
Very clear. Um, I'm interested that you're advocating
for this speed limits speed, um,
speed limiting devices within scoters.
Do you think that's something we could look at in for
motor vehicles generally to ensure there isn't, um,
excessive speed and danger as a result of that?
I, I believe that would be quite challenging
because New Zealand is not a unique market,
so no manufacturer manufacturers vehicles for New Zealand.
So that would require a change in the manufacturing process.
So I think that's difficult. Plus of course,
you also have the, you know, what is, what is the limit, uh,
um, because you vehicles need
to have the ability to overtake.
Um, so the limit's probably likely to be
above the actual maximum speed limit of 110 in New Zealand.
But the difference with the e mobility vehicles is
because they're really, they're, they're, you know,
they actually have the ability to drive at
motor vehicle speeds.
They're not actually a motor vehicle according
to the, to the, to the bill.
Um, but if they can go very fast, so if they're not,
you know, reduce their speeds to more like,
let's say bicycle speeds,
Seems like that, that is my, my question is,
what, what speed are
You suggesting? Um,
and you've also, you made a comment there that,
you know, it wouldn't, it would been practical
because of the manufacturing process for motor vehicles,
but you've also advocated that we should be doing this,
you know, in the manufacturing of,
or mandating that that must be done overseas.
What speed limit are you proposing?
Probably urban speed limits. So 30 50? Yeah,
50 50, yeah.
As a suggestion. Yes.
And where did you come up with that?
Just because it's the, the car limit. So
Because they, they tend to operate on, on urban roads.
Okay. As, as opposed to on cycle lanes or footpaths.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Tracy,
Um, just going back to the tsl, sorry.
Um, it's, um,
We're ahead of time. So
When granting A TSL, and I may have missed this,
but there was something about a fit
and proper person test as opposed to, um,
operational capability and experience.
Is, is that something you're advocating for
or is that what happens now? Oh,
Um, so, so at the moment it's, it's quite a narrow ground.
So yes. That, that fit
and proper assessment focuses very much on,
is there a history of, of, um, traffic violations
or infringement previous, um, criminal conduct?
Mm-hmm. Certainly our submission that, that,
that should be broadened that at the moment.
I understand that in 2024, there were,
there were 4,000 applications for TSL licenses.
About half of those were goods, um, service, good services.
So there is a, there's a huge amount of movement,
a whole lot of new entrants coming in.
And at the moment, um,
and we are told this by NCTA, they,
they don't have the ability to, for example, in
that TSL make judgements around, well, what's the scale
of the business you're planning to run?
How many, how many, um,
trucks are you going to be operating?
How many drivers are you going to employ?
So I'd submits probably outside the scope
of this particular bill, what a Ministry of transport review
of TSLs could do would be able
to allow a much more holistic assessment. So
Looking at that operational Absolutely.
Um, and yeah, that's right.
And also, um, what, what variety
of transport a service they're running.
For example, if you're operating livestock
and transport, you might, uh, you know,
that an example we'd submit that a history of working within
that particular sector is relevant.
'cause there are particular challenges around, for example,
animal welfare that we'd want good, uh, good operators
to be able to understand
before they went into particular sectors.
We understand that. Um,
I think it was reviewing the regulatory impact statement
that dates back, I think, to 2022 when it was noted that
that piece of work around TSL was still on the books.
So, um, suggested it's one of those issues
that hasn't been seen as a priority,
but certainly submit that for our members.
It is, we've just been at our North island seminar in Napier
where it was flagged several times.
Is that, um, certainly something that we'd like
to see some movement on.
And, um, the industry held to higher standards.
Uh, 'cause we certainly don't enjoy, um, the reports of,
of operators who, um, are operating inappropriately.
And as this legislation fixes, um, if they're suspended
or if their own TSL is breached, they're able to, um,
hop onto another operator's.
TSL and NCTA doesn't have the ability
to effectively kick them off
or prevent them from coming off.
So that's why we're very supportive of
Okay. Look, thank you. I will take
one more question from Cam.
No, that's fine. Are you okay, cool. Cool, cool.
And so just, okay, well I'll take one then.
Just quickly then. So what you're basically saying is, um,
is for NZTA, you want to have more powers,
but you also want discretion.
So it's trying to get that magic between the two
of those. That's
Right. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. Cool.
And the other one, in terms of the, you, you said some
of the, these mobility vehicles up to a hundred K speed
that they're capable of doing well,
they're really getting much, much more powerful.
If you've got that 2000 watt Yes.
Engine Yeah. They will be able to get much faster. Yeah.
And going sort of back to that point, the reality is they,
um, they are are used on lower speed environments,
so there's less need
for speed variability that you get with.
Yeah. And so,
and what, so what are we talking about scooters? Sorry.
Yeah, and, and Scooters
and mobility, e-bikes, scoot scooters, e-bikes.
Yes. Yeah. Okay. Yep. Right. Uh, okay.
Cam, sorry, mobility scooters.
I just had, so, um, submission, um,
talking about the near misses.
So you guys have a way of tracking
who's at fault in those near misses or, um,
I'm afraid we wouldn't simply
because we wouldn't hold that information very possibly.
Um, councils or NCTA or even
So, but yeah, so these are reported to your organization,
Anecdotally not getting
Off the ta near miss register,
which I don't think exists. Um,
But, but if there are serious crashes,
that'll be recorded course in crash out system.
So they may be, you have, may be able to get data there.
All we know is that they are hard to see
because they, you know, because of their small size.
Okay. And, but they can travel fast.
Cool. I think we'll call, we'll call it there.
So, Dom, mark, thank you. Really appreciate that.
And again, um, the officials will have noted
for the issues you raised,
and we're gonna look forward to
some advice on some of those things. Thank
You, chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks officials. Very brief.
Okay. Yep. Okay. So, um,
we've got some more submissions later on today.
Well welcome. We will be back in one. Yeah.
We'll get started. Well, welcome.
Um, we've got your, um, written submission.
We, um, we've slightly trying to work our way
through these submissions when we're allowed to, by virtue
of the house operating, non-operating on particular days,
it's, it's playing a bit of havoc Yeah.
With our programs, but, um, that is what it is.
Uh, so thank you for what you've given us already.
We've already met with, we've been visited two of the ports
and had some of the stakeholders that we've met with.
Uh, we've had a number of submitters
and working our way through those to try
and build, build ourselves up as bigger picture as possible.
Um, be fair to say that there are some differences
of views, which we are hearing.
So, um, you'll probably add to that.
Um, but, you know, very keen to hear what you've got to say.
And then, uh, there'll be plenty of questions.
So, um, if you wanna do the, the intros Yeah.
And, um, we'll go from there.
Definitely. Yeah. Thank, thanks very much.
Uh, yeah, really good to be here and appreciate that.
Chance to, to, um, to speak on behalf
of carriers in New Zealand.
Um, for, for us, new Zealand's a very, very good trade.
And I think that's evidenced by the number of carriers,
global carriers that are actually calling it New Zealand.
Um, relative to our size,
the carriers all have different strategies on
how they're going to structure their New Zealand networks.
We're all a little bit different,
but what we do all have in common is that we are, um,
wanting to grow our networks alongside New Zealand's growth.
That's the common thing.
We all, however, face challenges, um,
that are difficult, they're not impossible.
And we get through, we get, we get things done,
but sometimes we get them done not in the best economic
or efficient ways.
Um, some of those things, productivity, um, of course,
capacity to grow our vessel size
through the New Zealand ports
and the lack of resilience to,
to improve things when things go wrong, which they will do.
Um, increasing costs without productivity gains.
So we are, we are not just focused on, on ports
and what ports need to do.
Um, we're, we're looking at the full supply chain.
If it doesn't all work together,
there'll be a bottleneck somewhere
and it will, it won't go right.
That's Road Rail Depots customers working as well.
Um, we we're, we're mindful that we must plan
for the longer term future, um,
but we, we think
that we must also really focus on the next five years.
We've got, got five years
where potentially there's not a lot
of new capacity coming into the, into the,
um, the port scene.
Um, so we've gotta make sure that we can be efficient
and economically provide those, that capacity
to meet New Zealand's growth aspirations
in the next five years.
We need the supply chain, we think,
to be better than world class.
We've got, um, of course, um, geographical small scale.
We've got difficulties which we've gotta overcome.
And I think we've gotta be better than just world class
to compete with other countries.
The carriers are all well-placed
to basically put in larger ships
and meet the needs of the New Zealand market.
Um, but I think we need to work together a lot closer
to remain an attractive market for our leaders
and our principles overseas to want to deploy larger
and more economically friendly vessels
to New Zealand trades. You want to do that, Gary?
Yeah. Hi. And, uh, just for a matter of, uh, the people,
it's Mark Scott and I'm Gary Cardiff from Marc Jim Group
agencies, just on top of, uh, what Mark says, New Zealand
to serve by the top six carriers in the world.
So there's no doubt that New Zealand plays an
important part in our global.
Having said that, it's, it's quite a complex market
and there's a lot of focus
and you'll no doubt hear a lot
around exports from New Zealand,
but it is a trade that we see just
as important on the inbound as a,
as an international carrier.
The cargo we carry into New Zealand is just
as important as the exports.
So that distribution of ports up
and down the country is quite complex.
It's also quite costly.
In fact, our largest customer in New Zealand
is, uh, empty containers.
And this is, uh, one of the complexities of, uh,
New Zealand, top half of the north island is
where the population and consumption is.
And of course our export distribution is throughout the
country from North Port right through to Bluff.
So inside there, there are some, uh, some lots
of inefficiency, let's say, in terms of, uh, dry containers,
refrigerated containers, getting to,
to the right place, uh, at the right moment.
The, the, uh, the, the issue that we find
and, uh, there's a lot of talk about bigger ships being, uh,
being introduced into the New Zealand trade.
New Zealand trade is significant,
but it's not that significant in terms of some of the size
of ships being talked about here.
15, 16,000 if you looked at New Zealand in terms
of actual full containers, it's roughly 34,000 TU per week.
We are talking people with 15,000, 16,000 TU ships.
That would require quite a bit of consolidation of carriers.
And there's so much differentiation in carriers in terms
of their objectives that we can't prescribe something
necessarily that's going to be be good for New Zealand,
but not great for, for the different objectives
of different carriers and that competitiveness,
which is very much something the exporters would talk to.
So in terms of, uh, where we see things, uh, and, and,
and on Mark's point around, um,
particularly the efficiency in New Zealand,
what we've seen in terms of productivity as a reduction in,
uh, where we are today versus where we were even in 2016 17,
our vessels are taking longer to, uh, to be, uh,
to be worked in ports.
And by definition, uh,
they are generally coming into New Zealand,
maybe 60% on time and leaving late.
Uh, and this is a feature of the New Zealand
where we have issues and ports with resilience.
Uh, the biggest two, of course, Auckland and Ong
and in front of Ong is quite a challenge at the moment
with their regular, uh, trying to extend their birth
and maybe get that, uh, that
that footprint they have more efficiently.
There is a challenge there
and it's a, it's a quite a significant challenge
for New Zealand and I think that gets, um,
mis misunderstood just how important that is.
Uh, in terms of, uh, New Zealand Inc's development,
the biggest export port in New Zealand, Auckland's just
as important in inside that, uh, as well.
And, and to have Auckland efficient
and enabling, uh, the, uh, the, uh, vessels
to transit New Zealand and finalize tower and exit on time
or roughly on time is, uh, is probably the biggest, uh,
biggest issue that we face today.
They don't do that. You can arrive on time in Auckland
and leave our leave out of, uh, out of time.
We just don't have the resilience in our
schedules these days with some of the complexities of, uh,
weather and, uh, and, uh, and international, um, challenges.
Mm-hmm. Right.
Yeah. We, we, we are providing the assets on those
services and there's a variety of services
and, you know, we're well served.
We're looking to get, you know, the best utilization out
of those assets from our principal's point of view.
They'll, um, have weekly services.
Um, but currently we are probably losing up to six to eight
services, um, a week, uh, uh, a year.
Mm-hmm. And that's, that's significant.
Um, at the moment, volumes are, are probably not, um,
have haven't grown a lot since 2019,
even in late in volumes.
We can cope with it at the moment.
And as I said, you know, we, we actually get it done,
but we don't get it done in the best, most efficient way.
Um, there's costs to everybody, um, right
through the supply chain that, um, are, are significant,
not only ourselves, but exporters, ports, everyone.
So, um, you know, as Gary said, you know,
we're taking longer to get through ports.
Um, that means that if a vessel is late
and vessels will be late vessels, vessels are, are affected
by weather, ports will have problems.
But it's what we do about it if we are late
and how do we contribute to getting
that ship back on schedule
and avoid losing more sailings of that vessel
or omitting ports.
We quite often have to change the rotation around the coast,
so that's extra steaming.
Yep. Um, discharging containers, re stowing, it's all c
that, that goes back to, um, you know,
not being the best supply chain
that we can be in being better than anybody else,
that we need to be better than everyone else.
Yep.
Okay. There's gonna be heaps of questions. Yep.
So I'm gonna start with tracing. Mm-hmm.
Dan, so just on that, um, supply chain coordination.
So, um, how could run the tape,
how could shipping lines, ports, exporters
and, uh, government coordinate better?
You must have thought about the ways in which this
could work better.
Um, what the formal mechanisms could be, um, whether it's a,
um, airtime council
or whatever is required to, to improve that coordination.
I mean, I, I think there's, there's, there's probably
three phases to what we need to do.
You know? Sure. We've gotta put our mind
to the very longer term future.
What do we need? Do we need another larger port somewhere?
Um, that's a, that's a, a long way off the 10,
maybe five to 15 years.
Do we need to be looking at things like, um, hubbing
and that that will be mentioned probably by a number
of parties, um, as carriers.
We've all got different ideas on that. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
So we are not saying you should do that or not do that.
Um, but what we, what we'll focused on now is
that in the next five years, we need to be able
to cope with growth.
We hope we're gonna have growth in that time.
We need to be able to cope with it.
Luckily we have assets in some of the ports
and our two major ports.
We have more assets than we are probably making use of.
And so New Zealand is becoming more of a, a seasonal,
it's always been a seasonal country as far
as your exports are concerned.
And even the imports mm-hmm.
Generally all came in in the second part of the year in,
in a, in a greater number.
Um, that's flattened out a little bit,
but exports are still, are still predominantly in that,
that, say February till June period.
We, we don't have a, we don't have a flat, um, volume
that we have to handle yet.
We have set labor
and set workforces trying to handle that.
So either you've gotta have surplus when you don't need it
and cover the cost of that,
or you're going to be short when you do need it.
And then our ships are not worked, uh, to the optimum,
whether it's having four cranes
or five cranes working on it, they might only have three.
So that means we're in port longer,
we can't achieve our goals,
and, uh, the vessel has to speed up.
And that's, that's limited as well.
I think you've covered that before.
Um, so those are the limitations that we face,
but we see it in probably in three different phases
that we need to concentrate on what we're doing now to,
to improve things to, to,
If I can just add, uh, there,
there's three major ports in New Zealand, Auckland
and Littleton and all face asset
development changes at the moment.
So those would be a priority I would think, in terms
of any barriers to, uh, to, uh, to that development, um, uh,
occurring and any, any facilitation that's needed, uh,
from a regulatory perspective.
Yeah, pretty important. 80% of export
and important people talk about export only.
It should remind, it's important as well.
It's just as important
and as carriers, we're not here just for the exports,
it's the importers, uh, the imports into the country, which,
uh, which are just as important on a,
on a bus service essentially.
Um, the other, and the other thing I was going to add, uh,
and I missed it in my first point, was just
around the sustainability.
Our ability to, uh, to have resilience in our schedules
or make up time is, is limited these days
with our IMO regulations, uh, that start
to get more punitive on the vessels year by year, uh,
towards 2030 as we trying to reduce our, uh, emissions.
So that's one sort of factor which plays into our,
uh, our, our future.
We might come back to that one. Sure, we will. Dan,
Thanks for your submission, mark
and Gary, um, just want to continue along the lines of,
you know, what does the future look like?
What does the ideal future look like?
I guess we we're getting a lot of issues in this inquiry.
Yeah. We're getting bogged down with what,
what's going on right now.
I'm wondering if you can paint a picture for us around,
you know, if you, if you were to start from a blank canvas,
what is the most optimal efficient structure for,
uh, the supply chain?
So, you know,
and you, you mentioned possibly another large port.
Um, if we were to start again with, could we just make one
of the three ports that you mentioned, just, just
invest like, you know, anything into that particular port.
So that's one question is, um, the hub
and spokes model is that, you know,
that's come up a lot of times.
Yeah. But if you were to design the system again,
what, what would that look like?
Um, you know, just, just paint a picture for us around,
you know, it might take a few years for us to get there,
but if you design it from scratch,
what would be the most efficient system for New Zealand
to think about in the next, uh, 20 years?
Uh, I think as far as the, the hub and spoke,
and I'll, I'll just deal with that one for a start.
Um, you know, as Gary said,
new Zealand's spread out with its exports.
Mm. And you know, we have
to move our empties around the coast.
They come into the upper North Island, uh, predominantly.
Um, you've got Auckland Port, you've got Taronga Port
with substantial volumes.
You've got Littleton port, um,
and another island with, with substantial volumes as well.
You've got a port like Napier, which has got very seasonal,
um, growth in the, in the, in the horticulture, which is,
which is growing strongly.
Um, not easy to access as well as far as road and rail.
So it's on the route of the East Coast
where the vessels are going.
And like New Zealand's served by a lot
of ports, probably, probably too many.
But, but we've got them
and we, we may as well use that, that that blue highway
and call it those ports.
Now, now that we've invested in them, if you are
calling directly at those ports
and perhaps port charmers as well, if it's some strong dairy
and, and, um, another focus
of reefer down in the south island,
you're not really got a lot of volume left to hub.
You, you, if you were hubbing, you would probably be trying
to hub at least 40%, 50% of your cargo through to the,
to the big ships in, in a potential port.
A big ship's also only, um, efficient if it's full.
Otherwise it's just costing a lot of money
to run if it's, if it's half empty.
Um, and with New Zealand seasonal, um, fluctuations
part of the year, that's gonna be the reality.
Mm-hmm. We are trying to get our vessels as full
with latent, inbound and outbound.
And that's what makes New Zealand a really good trade
as well, because we are much more balanced in a lot
of countries and who have got a lot of inbound
and not a lot of outbound.
So volume wise we're, we're pretty balanced in
and out container type wise.
If it's refrigerated
or dry containers, we're, we're a little bit Yeah.
Imbalanced. Imbalanced.
Um, which means we've got to bring a lot
of empty refrigerator containers in.
We've gotta send a lot of dry containers out as well.
So we we're all trying to do, but we're all different. Yeah.
The way we, in the way we work
and we, we source those boxes from, um, and,
and how we, we structure our services
And um, just to how
to smooth out the import export kind of flow.
Um, I guess that's in relation, that's makes it tough when,
where we are positioned globally.
Yeah. Any other examples on overseas around
what other countries that are quite remote, um,
and how they smooth out the import export volume or?
Yeah, like I, I think the import volume
is, is flattening out.
Yeah. Quite a lot. It used to be focused on the second part
of the year for Christmas and, and other things like that,
but it's now there's a lot of other buying, um, trends that,
that happen nowadays.
So imports is, is has flattened out a, uh, quite a bit.
Exports as well it has done as well
because, you know, apple season goes longer,
QRU season goes longer are the drivers of, um, of the demand
and the, those times.
Yeah. Um,
and dairy not an easy, not an easy, um,
task to flatten those out.
Mm-hmm. Um, the com the countries that we're competing with,
um, in our hemisphere looking at South America, places like
that, which are the scale
and the scale of that, they're putting into those, those,
and, and the infrastructure they're putting in
for their port wise to be efficient is, is quite phenomenal.
So we, we are competing with those countries
and that's why we, we, we say, you know,
new Zealand's gotta act like a country rather than we're not
competing with each other in the
ports, we've gotta do the right thing.
Yeah. And, um, we're, we are competing with,
with other countries,
Actually, sorry, if I can just,
'cause you, you mentioned any sort
of alignment with, uh, other countries.
Brazil's probably a good example where the export, uh,
profile is similar to New Zealand high reefer content,
smaller sort of dry content,
but Yeah, very much, uh, the population in
and around the major city there.
So they, they've still got services, which call it various,
uh, various ports up
and down their coast, uh, on the basis
of the proximity of the cargo.
And I think that's a big part of why we call
so many ports in New Zealand anyway,
right from Bluff all the way through to North Port.
It's proximity of exporter
and near nearest appropriate port, which, uh,
which drives some of that behavior, insights, the exporters.
I know Fontera particularly we're looking, uh, you know,
in the North island to try
and centralize as much as possible in Ong,
but Ong has got a crunch point at the moment though there
really is no more room for vessels, uh, at the moment
that you would've heard from perhaps, uh, MSC,
that they couldn't get a new service into Taronga
unless they did something with an existing service.
So there are some complexities with New Zealand,
which mirror, uh, Brazil.
And I think the thing that we try and take away is to try
and prescribe it into one or two ports in New Zealand.
Maybe be, uh, advantageous for some, but not for all. Okay.
Thank you Julianne.
Julianne, then I'm gonna come back up here, but
Yeah, I mean, I think you've covered most
of my questions now, but I was thinking, um, the point
that you made about not competing
with other ports in New Zealand.
Um, like have you got any thoughts on
how New Zealand's port sector could be working
more collaboratively?
Like who should take the leadership role?
Should it be central government?
Should there be, uh, you know, given
that there's different ownership structures?
Yeah, different ownership models. Um,
and so every port's mainly thinking about what
is gonna be best for them, for their owners.
Um, and,
and it all ties in with our other infrastructure as well
for transport, uh, the transport to get things
to and from the port.
So just wondering if you have any
Thoughts about that. Yeah, it's an
interesting point.
'cause they, the ownership is something that, uh,
is quite unique for New Zealand.
Yeah. So in most cases we've got, uh, local government, uh,
ownership of, uh, of those assets with some,
some challenges, uh, in and around funding, uh, development.
And that's certainly the case in LPC at the moment. Mm-hmm.
Um, and, um, in different, uh, um, in, in Targa for example,
they've got the ability, but not the, uh, the uh,
uh, the green light to go.
But, um, I think that's, that's a a good point.
'cause if we look at Australia where there are some
difference, uh, in ownership of terminals.
Uh, we, we generally have, uh, a port
with one terminal operator, Australia.
They've got a little bit of a variety.
So there is that competitive factor.
And what you do see up and down Sydney, Brisbane
and Melbourne is a little bit more collaboration,
which assists us when we are calling it the first port
and they're coordinating at the next port, the ability
to maybe take up some slack and, uh,
and, um, enable, uh, our vessels to transit through there
and depart on time from the next port and, and and such
and so forth, uh, in the following ports.
That's the sort of collaboration that would work
as an example, that's just working with a terminal operator.
Yeah. So, but would are, we're probably not big enough
to have multiple terminal operators competing.
So in that case, would, you know, maybe the ownership needs
to be at a central government level?
Well, and that whichever way it would
and wouldn't be here to prescribe it.
But the collaboration is the point
that you made is absolutely important.
Um, 'cause what happens in Auckland is important in
Littleton and then Napier Wellington or wherever it may be.
And certainly for Ong, it's largely the last port
for New Zealand, uh, before export. Yeah.
We, we generally come into Auckland
first on most of our services.
If that goes wrong, we miss out on our windows at all the
ports and we probably lose a week.
And that's losing a sailing.
Um, there's nothing worse than, than, you know, if, if,
if a service is due on a Friday
and another service is on a Saturday, the Friday's late,
but it'll come in and a port that's got three berths
and eight cranes, um,
cannot work those two ships together on the day,
on the next day, has to push one of them back,
or that vessel has to go back.
Seeing assets there
that are not being used when we are sitting there waiting
with our asset is, is, is frustrating.
Mm-hmm. And that's down to one thing, labor, flexibility,
resilience, but having that labor that's got to be there
as resilience, that's got to be paid
for by somebody as well.
And we've also got to remain competitive with the world.
Um, can you just, um, before I go to Carlos, um,
and then Cam, um,
can you just spell that out a little bit more?
So, in the Australian model, we see this collaboration, is
that because you've got the same operator, um,
if in the multiple operator model you've got the same
operator operating out of all three ports Yeah.
What are they doing that's different to
what we're seeing in New Zealand?
And could we get anything from that,
even given our different opera, different ownership models?
Yeah. Look, and it's prob it's an example
of a terminal operator being able to sort of coordinate up
and down the three key ports.
'cause they're operating because they're operating. Yep.
It doesn't necessarily have to be that way,
but, uh, I think, uh, the, the point that was made is more
around the collaboration, uh,
and the example that, that that can be achieved
between ports coordinating for a particular ship,
their labor models and
or ability to, uh, to to scale up port scale.
So can you just walk, could you just walk us through, so,
uh, a ship arrives late in Auckland.
Yeah. Um, okay.
And you've gotta get through various other places.
How does that work to actually try
and in the opt in the optimal world to get it
through the other ports as best and efficiently as possible
and then get out, you know, as efficiently as
Possible. So you want, you want then
be able to maximize your,
you might, you might have your, if everything's going right
and the ship on time, you might work three cranes,
but have the ability to work four cranes
or even five cranes to make up some time on that vessel.
And you might have the same in, in Littleton
that the key ports
and in as well might have the ability to put on extra cranes
to try to make up some of that lost time,
which is inevitable gonna happen.
Um, or it might be the ports shut through wind
and there's, there's been a number of things this year.
It's been more than properly. We've, yeah.
We've seen, we've seen ever with swell problems,
wind problems, it's, it's, it, it happens.
Um, I think, you know, with, with Australia,
with the probably three to four operators
and each of the, each of the ports,
if a vessel arrives there, they will move the labor around.
Mm-hmm. So they won't have that labor fixed to that port.
They know that ship is on the Australian coast
and it's going to Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane.
That's generally the rotation.
They'll make sure that they move the assets around
so they can maximize their cranes at each place,
not just do their bit.
And then it's gone.
Um, they're taking ownership for when
that vessel will actually depart from Australia
and can get back to, to wherever it's going
and come back again on time.
And that's the key productivity.
That's your key productivity is to be able to, to be able
to up it when you need to because it will happen.
But what currently happens now, say if we are a day late,
um, generally if the, the next operator, Gary,
is on the birth the next day, we can't get on it.
And if everybody's on time for the rest of that week,
you are basically looking at your
next window of the next week.
What we're finding at the moment is that the number
of moves required to complete what we call our exchange,
so the lifting on
and lifting off of a vessel may be restricted.
So they'll come to us and say, you need
to reduce by 200 moves.
That means empties down a port charm as Littleton,
lift an Auckland, rather than
distribute it to the exporters.
And that's what we are trying to chew, trying
to achieve within that window.
Before we're off, get outta here because I, I can't do that.
I know they've got one sub on this.
Any other subs on this one, but just
Very quickly. So if all
the flexibility required to, um,
increase efficiency is
provided on shore via labor movements, what's to stop, um,
that impacting your drive for to be on time?
And like I understand where that happens, but Yeah, yeah.
If all the flexibility is, is taken care of
For you. Um, um,
I think ev everybody's, it's on everybody
to, to, to do it.
We will still be looking to be as efficient as we can
and, you know, our vessels off we'll limit what we can, um,
our driver is to, is to, to fill that ship,
but to get the empties to the next places as well.
Mm-hmm. We have to get empties offshore as well, not just
for exports into the, yeah.
Into the d into the deficit areas.
We've gotta get them offshore,
otherwise the, the depots become congested.
And then that, that's another whole problem that we've got.
And that's, I would say the whole supply chain needs to be,
to be up their game
because depots are a almost a forgotten thing as well.
That's where the, the containers are processed, that's
where they're washed, they're repaired, they,
they're made ready for, for whoever.
Mm-hmm. So it's got to be everywhere that that does it.
So we are, we are doing our best to try
to, to get there as well.
Um, yeah, we understand ports can't have labor just lying
around to, to, to do, to do nothing.
But it needs to be, it, it's very common.
It's very common for us to have to cut moves. Mm.
And to change rotation of vessels
or emit ports, which means that, you know, if we, if we have
to omit a port like Littleton, we may have
to take off 500 containers in alt mm-hmm.
And reload them again, trench them.
That's just a total cost to us, basically.
Um, there's no recovery of that.
So extra steaming around the coast, um, we may have to, to
to go north and then comes south again.
It's just a complete waste. So if we have that resilience,
another good example of that is, is, um,
is empty containers.
We like to get those on the,
on the top stove of the vessels.
Um, they're all in Auckland, so your first port's Auckland,
um, you don't wanna put them on the vessel down low,
so you've gotta put as many as you can on,
but by the time you get round to Taronga
and you've loaded reefer and make fuel it,
but you, you're basically,
you've got too much heavy stuff on top.
You may have to restow those empties up
and you have to send endless boxes from Auckland to Taronga.
We're all doing hundreds of boxes a week to Taronga
to load on the ships, which if we could pop back into
Auckland again for a second call, they could all be
that break on in Auckland without any gas.
That there's, there's efficient inefficiencies
that are happening, um, right through the supply chain.
And, uh, but we, we've, we just see that,
that resilience and,
and we are looking at that five years,
what are we doing five years.
And I mean our, you, you may have heard from some
of the carriers that the principles are, are unhappy.
They compare New Zealand to a lot of other,
um, countries that they deal with.
Um, both our companies run ports all over the world Mm.
As well. They generally look at their own ports that they,
that they, they operate in, and they, they base it on that.
Um, so it it's a, it, it's,
it's a long gonna be a long five years.
We, we hope we grow, our imports will grow, um,
into New Zealand and our exports will, will, will grow,
uh, in that five years.
And we see that we're under a lot of pressure now,
even under a, a kind of a, a lower volume.
Mm-hmm. Um, yeah, definitely.
And we see that, that pressure, um,
that the inefficiencies could grow as that volume, congests
depot, ports, trucking
and other things, um, to a, to a critical level again.
And Okay. That's where we wanna,
I'm gonna take Carlos and, and then, and then Cam,
Thank Chair. Um,
on your return submission,
you mentioned something about continu
increase in regulatory demand.
Can you, can you walk us through
what's, what have been changed?
Is there any, uh, example or, or anything
or unnecessary, um, red tab or,
or causing the extra barrier to the sector?
Yeah, sorry. This is the, uh, part of the four points.
Uh, the ability to achieve this going forward could be
seriously compromised for several weeks
and continued increased in regulatory demands.
Yes. Probably the greatest example of some, um, some,
some challenge around the regulation or, uh, or, uh,
or approval processes in tar.
Again, I would cite that as an important one for,
in the context of New Zealand's exports.
This is a critical, critical part.
So from a influential, uh, perspective, what we do,
uh, regulatory wise in and around approving ports
and with the fast track bill has enabled Auckland to do
what they, they do.
But, uh, that's one part of the equation in a,
the other part's enabling the, uh, the labor, uh, tar.
It doesn't have that issue. It just has the, uh,
the inability to sort of grow its current footprint,
which is a real challenge, uh, that
that one is, uh, critical.
But if, if there's any red tap, you want us
to be moved Now what, what, what will it be?
I think, um, the, um,
ICLC fits under shipping New Zealand as well.
Shipping New Zealand, I think made a submission as well.
Yeah. And they covered quite a lot of the, um, the issues
with challenges with, with those things in their submission.
Um, we didn't touch on too much in, in ours
because they as, as part of our, uh, you know, body
that we, that we work under.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that'd be looking at things like biofouling,
um, definitely improve, changing, all, all those other type
of, of increased, um,
You Yeah. Cost
the PI review, which
Is, that's probably covered mainly on there.
We didn't wanna duplicate too much of that.
It affects both containers.
Okay. Thank you. Chair. Sorry.
Uh, yeah, it's pretty clear it's becoming clear
to this committee that linchpin
of the entire system is actually tied on it.
Critical. Um, we talked about productivity,
workforce capacity, resilience.
I think we can, um, expand on those.
But, um, oh, connection links row out.
I've got a lot of questions, but in my limited time, uh,
this country has done multiple reviews into ports
and maritime now.
Um, things that productivity
and workforce, all those things I just listed total longer
has gotten worse and worse and worse.
Um, hasn't been improvement. We've done previous reviews.
It really is getting to the
point where something has to be done.
What, what would you like this committee,
or what do you think this committee
and its review could do differently
that would actually start getting
some of these things changed?
Or do you think it's already happening through things like,
um, resource management, uh, changes, infrastructure,
investment, um, is that part of the pan,
but what can we do as a committee?
Uh, I guess, I guess the Taronga one is a, is something
that we would've hoped that would've been almost done now,
and in their eyes it would've been done now as well.
Um, key thing with those things is also you've got to have,
um, the other parts linked into that rail
is, is a critical part.
Taronga expands their birth.
You've got to, you've got to improve the rail. Mm-hmm.
Um, going between Auckland and,
and Taronga on that, you've got also then enlarge
what you're doing in Auckland to handle those containers in
and out of the, the metro port area there.
So there's those things are in place, they're just not here.
And I think that they are, this is what we think.
Maybe they're five years away before they get built and
before they actually get integrated properly into the supply
chain to make a real contribution to that.
Before, you know, we,
we would look at moving services to there.
We wouldn't move services there if, if it,
it was taking a week or 10 days to get the boxes from there.
Mm-hmm. Um, there's, there's things that haven't happened
as quickly like that.
Um, north Port's probably another one. Yeah. Good.
You know, we, we utilize North Port, um, during the,
the critical time in COVID.
And we basically, um,
but it was trucking only the rail connection
between North Port and the,
and the main line is still not there.
It's still nowhere near being there.
And so those things, if we get into a critical
situation again, um, we are gonna be back
to the same solutions,
but they're not going
to have improved at all since we used them last time.
Um, I think it's a good point.
We're gonna be looking for other, other ways.
You know, we, we looked at all sorts of things during
that time for wherever
the resources, where could we use them?
Where Wellington, for example. Mm-hmm.
Um, but the, the number, sheer number
of containers you're gonna take off in, in, in Wellington
to go to Auckland is, is, is massive.
You know, we're talking 2000 containers coming from,
it's just not possible to rail them.
I'm not trying to, yeah. I know, I'm not trying
to lead the witness here, but is it like, um,
like in relation to the previous inquiries
that have happened in this country around shipping, but what
and maritime and, um, rail links, like all
of those things are part of our terms of reference.
What does this committee need to emphasize on focus on?
Or is it simply a matter of we know what the problems are?
Yeah. Um, we just, this,
we've just got a light of fire under it.
And the previous inquiries, if you've looked at them at all,
um, do they do that enough?
And we actually at the point where inquiry is just a
red light saying, hurry up. Yeah.
Well, I think the, I think the, the flexibility,
the seasonal nature of New Zealand's always been there.
And I think it's getting, it's gonna get greater.
Our dry exports have gone down in the last six years.
By, by eight or 9% in our reef has gone up by 12 or 13%.
That's where, um, the, the seasonal nature of our business
is going to really kick in.
And, and how can we run an efficient port system with a,
with a fixed workforce, with a flexible volume?
Mm. Um, I, I don't see it.
And it, you know, the big ships, um,
other things like that are, um, yeah, we've,
we've got assets here, we've got assets that we can use,
but how do we put those into play?
Um, automation's a another, another, uh, factor in there.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, that can improve those sort of things.
We, we've simply got to keep our, our costs in line with
Those countries. My
question, uh, final sub I made hope is that
you just mentioned automation.
This committee's heard evidence that automation, um,
is something that we, that was like a high tide mark in
New Zealand retreated from, there's a lot
of pressure in the industry
to retreat even further from automation.
You guys, uh, your companies
that you representing have got experience around the world
with other ports that are doing Yeah.
Um, what did we do wrong, uh, in automation?
What could we do better?
What did, what, what was, could you provide the committee
with, uh, now or later oversight?
Just, just in terms of that automation question?
I think it was quite a new, uh, new idea, uh,
that was being introduced at the time.
So it was quite unique, huh.
Um, but I, I don't think we should walk away from, uh,
automation completely.
'cause with that, there are certain things like in every
business these days, uh,
and a lot of those, uh, simple,
simple activities can be taken care of with technology.
Uh, these days, uh, there is still room for that to happen.
And I'm sure, uh, that'll be something, uh, into the future.
That'll be a feature of even, even as, as an example.
But, um, but again, getting back to the, the things that,
uh, I think are important is really focusing on
those three key areas.
The things that we can influence.
Auckland Tower and, uh, Littleton, that's 80, 80%
of New Zealand's are throughput right there.
So there are some, some major issues in, uh, two
of those three, all three, if you,
you look at them in different, uh, context at the
Moment. I think, yeah,
it was, it was a cutting edge automation
project that, that was, um,
cutting edge at about time as well.
And it was, um, it was various, yeah, you can do,
you can do part automation, you can do full automation and,
and our terminal overseas have done both.
And, um, what's the, the fastest
full automation is not as fast as partial.
Um, feeding your, your crane, your,
your cranes automatically and drivers in their cranes still.
Mm-hmm. But, um, it, it was, it was, um,
they could have just put a model in that was,
that was basically, um, run in other ports of the world
and it would've been probably no problem.
Um, so,
but it, it, it has to be as, as the footprints
of those ports are not getting any bigger,
they're not going to get any bigger.
So you would operate on, say, in Auckland on that footprint
for the next 10, 15, 20 years, um,
before anything, you know, major happens.
Um, how do you do that safely and automation?
'cause it's gonna get higher, tighter in the
stacks to do that.
And, and the only way to do that is to, to safely is
to, is to automate.
Okay. Um, I've got a couple of questions.
First one of 'em just, just looking at the ports
and you basically focused on those three ports
as key, you are looking forward.
I mean, obviously there are some challenges
with a Clinton in terms of Yeah.
The city's desire to take bits of it over time,
or maybe it's probably not to containers.
It's probably, it's probably bulk, I would imagine. Yep.
Um, and, and Littleton, of course,
it's an ama it's a massive alluded to it.
A massive investment that's being required. Yeah.
They're also looking to grow by taking the trade out
of the other South island ports as well.
Do you just, you know, in terms of thinking about your hub
and spoke model and how the whole system
works, how do you see that working?
What are the options there?
Um, and I mean, Wellington, I think it's also,
also just recently got a service.
Yeah. You know, you've, you've said we we're bringing all
these containers into Auckland.
Is that the smartest, um, given that we, they've,
they've then gotta be distributed by
and large by land mm-hmm.
To the rest of the country? Or is it, you know,
is there a model which says actually we,
we are gonna drop some to, you know, we've got, we,
we've also got a major hub being developed at,
at Palmerston North.
Um, and then, so just what's, what's the optimal model?
Also that hub and spoke bit for the shipping, um, of
where the, as you get bigger ships, where they do go,
where they don't go, and where the,
those other hinterland areas draw either by ship
or by road or rail,
Uh, bigger ships, you know, you, you've,
um, you've gotta have them fall.
And, and that's the, that's the key thing.
Probably during, during COVID when there was a, there was a,
a bottleneck in Auckland Cargo did flow to other places
and, um, into the Palmers and North
and to Napier as Wellingtons and other places like that,
but it kind of, it went back again a bit.
Mm-hmm. Um, the population base is, is there, um,
in that upper, in that upper North island,
you've got places like the, um, project mm-hmm.
That's, that's coming in there. It's probably slower than
it, than it may have been designed to be.
Um, and so you find
that cargo is still coming into the Auckland region. Um,
Common is that, is that the optimal model effect
essentially bring mo nearly all
of it in the, well, not nearly all of it.
A large chunk, large proportion.
I think one of the, one of the key things with, with, um,
with Hubbing is that it's expensive
to handle boxes in New Zealand.
Mm. And it's a, it's expensive to handle them once
it's, to handle them twice is just putting extra cost on
it works overseas and hubbing and smoking
because you, you are, you've got big volumes
and perhaps labor costs are cheaper sometimes
in those things, but the sheer scale, how much you are,
you are hubbing into those, into those mega ports,
say into the Shanghais, Hong Kong, Singapores,
uh, they can handle it.
Mm-hmm. And the sheer scale, what's going in there is,
So what's the optimal model?
Oh, look, I, I, I think New Zealand,
because of our refrigerated cargoes, we want frequency.
We are gonna need our, our cargo going to the market, um,
more frequent rather than in one big ship, basically.
Um, over time as our products like kiwi, fruits and apples
and, and other refrigerated retainers, I think frequency.
And that's why, as Gary said
before, the larger, larger ship is simply not gonna come
Here. It's not gonna go over
all the ports have it,
but, uh, just, just on your hub and spoke, uh, model.
'cause there, there's certainly lines within our consortium
who would favor hub and spoke,
and there are carriers who prefer to, to, to make sure
that they have that little competitive edge
by calling perhaps Bluff
and some of the other ports, uh, for, for exports.
But the hub and spoke model in the general sense, uh, or,
and if I go back to those three key ports on the, uh,
certainly on the inbound and the outbound woodwork, um,
it's just a case of can the market sustain those, uh,
connectivities and uh, trench connections.
Yeah. Okay. Well, um,
and we are have lots of other questions too.
Look, I'm sure there's other things we'd like to follow up
with you, um, on what will be really useful is getting
that you, you talked about the number
of tus that come in Yeah.
It would be really good. And the seasonality Yeah.
If you've got any data on that,
that would be really helpful, I think, to understand Yeah.
What that looks like and where it comes to,
I know we've got, we've got the Yeah,
we've got the in and in and out bits.
Um, and if you've got any advice,
and we'll probably get direct advice from some
of the operators as well.
Yeah. Um, but as to, you know,
why they choose the model they choose.
Yeah. Um, and some obviously choose some ports
and others choose other ports.
That'll be, that'll be useful to understand as well. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah, we, we really appreciate it. Thanks.
Thank you very much both. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. And you're welcome to stay
for the next one if you want to,
or at least the first part of it.
Why not? Why not the first part and then,
and then you can tell us whether you want to stay
for the second part, which might be No, there we go.
Right. Okay. Well, thank you. And look, welcome.
So do you wanna bring the team up?
If you wanna bring the team up to the, the, uh,
table, that would be great.
Yes. Sit around
Very much.
So we've,
Thank you.
Um, we've got you here for 45 minutes. Um, what do you want?
Do you wanna split it as sort of 15 minutes
to go, or roughly?
We, I think if you tell us when you want to say, Hey,
these are the bits which we need to Yeah.
Uh, keep private for this, uh, this part. Mm-hmm.
We, when it gets to, uh, anything that's private,
ultimately we can report it.
Uh, but what we actually say is, you know, we're not,
we don't report anything verbatim
because, um, then our report will be,
that would be War in Peace times three, probably.
Um, so we're not gonna do that anyway, so we can pick
and choose what it is that we actually put in there,
but it's useful for us to get as much information
as, as we possibly can.
Yeah. Great. Yeah. But you let us know when you want
to flip that, that switch.
Excellent. Cool. So if you wanna introduce the team,
I'll do, and, um, then we'll leave it in your hands.
And we do like asking questions
and we will inevitably have questions still
burning until we finish.
Great. Uh, well, thanks Andy.
And, um, Tato, um, firstly I'll just introduce the team.
So my name's Emma Parsons. I'm the CEO of, uh, Kotahi.
Um, this is Santiago Owen, who's the, uh, director
of Global Supply chain for Fonterra.
And we've got Scott Hurley, who is, uh, the GM
of Supply Chain for Silver Fern Farms.
And we've also got Andrew Waki, who is our GM of vendor
and, uh, supply partnerships, um, with Kotahi.
Um, I think just before we,
before we kick off, I just wanted to acknowledge, um,
also the passing of Jim Bulger.
Thank you. Jim Bulger, um, who is a, a huge proponent
of the primary sector and a very dear, um, uh,
his son Matt is obviously a very dear, uh, uh, part
of our Fonterra Wau.
So, um, thinking of, uh, thinking of them today, um,
we're really grateful for the time.
We're really grateful for the, um, the huge amount of work
that's gone into the inquiry so far.
Um, it's, it's, um, it's very important, um, to us.
Uh, um, Kotahi is a, is a partnership between Fonterra
and Silver Fern Farms that was formed in 2011, um,
with the, the aim
of helping exporters win on the world stage.
Um, it, it came about, uh,
after the global financial crisis when, um, you know,
there was a lot of uncertainty around whether
or not New Zealand supply chain could actually, um, compete,
um, and, uh, and,
and make sure that exporters remained
competitive, um, globally.
And so today, Kotahi, um, manages freight on behalf
of 50, more than 50 New Zealand exporters.
So, um, exporters like, uh, obviously Fonterra, uh,
ine farms, but also Sea Lord and Sanford and Turners
and growers and, um, pan pack and, and,
and several other, uh, you know,
a large number of other exporters.
So, um, it's, it's always at the front of our minds,
um, you know, how the network is operating
to make New Zealand export is competitive.
Um, and I think this inquiry is,
uh, a critical part of that.
Um, so Kotahi today represents more than 30%
of New Zealand's containerized exports.
Hmm. Uh,
and I think, you know, a key point for us is
that our economic success is,
is absolutely anchored in the our, in our exports.
Um, and to, to remain globally competitive
exporters need a freight system that is reliable,
resilient, and cost effective.
Um, that means that our infrastructure across not just
ports, um, not just the ocean freight network,
but also across rail roads
and coastal shipping, um, all need to operate
as one coordinated network.
Um, and what we see right now is
that too many decisions are being made in a fragmented way.
Um, that they're often decisions that are made in isolation
with, you know, a regional lens or,
or a very local lens, rather than that sort
of national network lens, or,
or from the perspective of how do we compete with the world,
um, and compete on the world stage.
You know, we're often looking at how do we compete,
you know, here at home.
And, uh, the consequence of that, um,
that we're seeing is, you know, inefficiency, um,
in some instances duplication.
Um, and we think, you know, quite a bit
of missed opportunity for long-term value creation.
So our ask of the inquiry
and our ask of of government is to, to drive
a coordinated New Zealand export, um, supply chain strategy
that prioritizes productivity and competitiveness,
and that ensures that the export supply chain supports
growth, um,
that the export supply chain in its own right
is economically sustainable.
Um, and, and,
and, you know, in doing so, be able to be resilient, um,
through, you know, through the long term.
So there's four key priorities.
We see that this, this strategic approach needs
to reflect the first being, taking a long term, uh,
and national view of key infrastructure.
So ensuring that regional investment decisions serve
exporters in the economy, uh, as a whole,
not just local priorities
or individual port interests at the
expense of the national network.
The second is, um,
prioritizing investment in New Zealand's
key strategic ports.
You know, there are gaps today in terms of, uh,
our port's ability to, uh, um, focus on the future.
We see the strategic ports as being Auckland toga, uh,
Littleton and Port Otago.
Um, the fast track decision around the Port of T ot, uh,
sorry, um, port of toga birth extension is, um, is critical
to support export growth.
Um, thirdly, um, prioritizing an efficient hub
and spoke ocean freight network model, um, with Kiwi Rail
as a critical enabler, um,
of freight consolidation through that network.
Uh, and then lastly, you know, um, preventing, um,
or really thinking careful carefully around, um,
where there's duplicate regional investment happening, um,
so that we avoid regrettable spend, um, and, uh,
and sort of, you know, sunk costs in the sector, um, that,
that create a drag in, in the long, in the long run.
So, um, if we can align spend across the industry to,
to a sort a national strategy, um, we think that will, um,
build resilience, enhance productivity,
and strengthen our competitiveness in the long run.
Um, but the, but the growth
of our export sector really depends on, on the connectivity
of these networks
and, you know, our ability to compete on the world stage.
Um, and so addressing these infrastructure challenges now we
see as a really high priority.
Um, so thank you. We won't take up too much time
with, with preamble.
Um, and, you know, again, very, very grateful for the time
and, um, open to any questions.
Thank you very much for that.
Um, Dan's got the
first question, and then I'll take the second one
Unless anybody Else, Mr.
Chairman, welcome. Uh, thank you to your team for, uh,
what you do for our, um, ports
and transportation sector.
Um, could I ask you to elaborate on, you mentioned
around the fragmentation of decisions.
Um, could you help the committee understand
some practical examples of decisions that, you know,
in hindsight were fragmented, um,
or I guess you've pointed to the investment decisions,
but just help us understand what, what are the decisions
that are too fragmented that need
coordination from a national level?
Um, that'd be helpful.
So I think, um, one of the, you know, one of the things
that comes to mind is, um, when we are looking at, you know,
significant investments into port infrastructure,
making sure that those investments are, you know,
firstly aligned to the capacity
that the network requires in the long run, you know,
that we're actually sort of working on a,
a common foundation in terms of
what export growth are we expecting, where do we expect that
to come from, um,
and is the infrastructure, um, set up in such a way that
that's going to be managed optimally?
So if we're investing, for example, in, um, you know, if,
if every port in New Zealand is investing to be able
to handle big ships, for example,
that's probably not that efficient.
Um, you know, there, there are,
there are probably only a couple of ports that need to have
that kind of capacity.
Um, and the job to do is actually on the land side
to make sure that we consolidate, um,
consolidate the freight through that network.
Um, so if, for example, you're putting a, you know,
putting Kiwi rail in a situation where they're, you know,
having to serve a number of different, uh, you know,
a really extensive, um, port network, you know, you,
you can get duplicate investment on the, on the land side,
um, but you can also get duplicate investment in
the, in the port side.
Thank you. That's very helpful.
I was gonna go into a, a, a very similar place, uh, in terms
of that prioritize,
prioritizing investment in the key areas.
So, I mean, quite clearly everybody is saying we've gotta
fix the, the tower on the situation, uh,
but there are definitely question marks
around Auckland and, and what happens there.
And it, its ability to do, certainly
to grow on a limited footprint in the city's desire
to do things in that space.
Littleton, the course is a huge investment required,
and you've, you are probably the one, a lot
of the others have not mentioned Port Otago.
So, I mean, obviously there's a lot of dairy down in the,
and, and, and meat down in the,
the south of the south island.
Mm-hmm. So, just wanted to, can you walk us through that?
And then of course, there's also the thing
around North Port mm-hmm.
And whether North Port takes some of the load out
of, out of Auckland as well.
What does it look like for you?
And then the other question, if I can throw in there
as well, we've had a real mixed bag
of views about the performance of Kiwi Rail.
Um, if you can just give us your thoughts on, um,
how Kiwi Rail is operating in your view.
It's customer service, um,
and if there is anything to be done to improve that, uh,
with it by infrastructure
or by the way it operates. Mm-hmm.
Perfect. Um, well, let's start with the, your question
around, you know, um, Auckland, I, I think
that the way that, um, ports are set up at the moment,
they're making rational decisions
to optimize within the constraints that,
you know, that they're operating within.
Um, and, you know, port of Auckland have done a,
a fantastic job of, you know, increasing the return on,
on the invested, you know, the, the capital that is invested
by Auckland is in, in that port.
They've got a very clear mandate to do that.
Um, but you know, if you're, arguably
that's a reasonably short term lens
to take on the situation.
Mm-hmm. And the question I I, I come with, I suppose is,
is if you were looking at the North island as a whole,
would you be making all of the same investment decisions
that you, you know, that you, that you currently are?
Um, and,
and I think that's the challenge for, you know,
for the sector is to, um, is to look at things at a more,
in, in a more integrated way
and say, well, what's the actual total capacity
that you need out of the North island?
What's the resilience
or risk that you need to, um, factor into
that infrastructure in the north island?
Uh, and, you know, and
therefore, what are the choices
that you're making at the moment?
Each individual, um, entity is making, you know,
probably very rational decisions, um, within the,
the framework that they're operating in.
To go to Dan's question can just to, to,
um, build that up a little bit.
Can you point to some things that you would say in a
national context, or even an island by island context,
you'd say, Hmm, that's questionable.
If you, if you think about, for example,
and again, this isn't, hasn't happened,
but if you're expanding TOMA and you're expanding Auckland
and you're expanding North Port, you know, our view would be
that that would create excess capacity in the North island.
Um, and so, but,
but you know, for individual regions, you know
that they're acting in a, in a,
in a rational way considering their own interests and,
and the, the sunk costs
that they have in the investments they
have in there to date.
Um, so, so it's those kinds of trade-offs that, um,
that probably aren't being made.
Um, you know, that where we see opportunity to, um,
you know, be more efficient, yeah.
Then go into the kiwi rail.
But, um, or perhaps south island first in terms of,
you know, port, so, so, um, so
yes, there's a lot of, um, volume in the south island,
and that's, um, you know, that actually has very good,
you know, route to market right now out of Bo Bord Otago.
Um, but again, it's a more of a resilience question, um,
in the South Island, um, as well as a, um, you know,
as well as a sort of an efficiency question.
So the Littleton investment we do see is really, um,
really important, um, to, to making sure
that you have enough capacity in the south island.
Um, but again, I think there is a resilience question
that you wanna, um, consider, uh, in that context as well.
In Port, port Otago, um, well set up Kiwi rail.
Um, so, you know, perhaps,
perhaps you'd like Kiwi Rail sent.
Yes. Um, and, and I'll provide you with, um,
some context in terms of whether that Kiwi rail fit into,
um, Fontera supply chain.
Um, na, we have a, in, in nature,
we have a multimodal supply chain in Frontera.
As you would imagine, um,
reaching 8,500 farms spread across most
of the country's region, uh, can only be done
with a combination of, um, modes
and certainly trucks road is, uh, the best option there.
When we consolidate all
of our farmers milk into our manufacturing sites,
and we start to talk about, um, larger scale,
longer distance type of movements, uh,
rail is a fundamental solution for our supply chain network.
And we have a, a history of working together
with Kiwi rail in terms of creating the infrastructure,
not only at at fontera sites,
but also the infrastructure leading into ocean ports, um,
to, to enable that.
Roughly 50% of our moves, uh,
of finished goods today is done through rail.
So it's, it's a, it's the backbone of our
supply chain leading into international markets
and, um, into ports
that eventually we reach a hundred customers, uh,
a hundred countries with roughly 1000 customers.
Um, we are, um, quite comfortable
with the way Kiwi really is operating in, in our network,
um, the last, um, two years, which I can refer to,
since I'm in the role, we have hit high levels of, um,
operational performance.
And in our operation we have a very collaborative, um, way
of working to understand, um, operational issues
and also strategic, um, opportunities to make, um,
both operations more efficient.
I think if there would be one thing
that we have in our wishlist, um, would be, uh, an element
of longer term certainty that will allow us
to invest further into, um, more efficient, uh, networks.
We have a good example with Crawford Street,
which I understand some of you might, might have visited.
Uh, so that's a purpose, um, design, uh, location, uh,
with all the infrastructure around it to enable
consolidation of cargo, enable economies of scales,
and, um, taking New Zealand goodness to the world in,
in the most efficient way without the certainty of, um,
kiwi rails commitment to certain lines or,
or future investments.
Uh, those sort of, uh, developments that not only benefit,
uh, the private sector, but ultimately
benefit New Zealand Inc.
Can cannot be done, which is one of the, the things that we,
um, try to make clear enough submission.
Okay. Do you wanna spell, spell those out?
Or, um, you know,
where the particular investments you, you think are important?
Um, I, I think it goes, um, hand in hand with the, um,
the comment on consolidation of ports
and make sure that we have a clear strategy in terms of
how New Zealand connects with the world,
and then create the land site networks that,
that come along with it.
So it's what, what we, um,
what we are, um, proposing is that, um,
rather than having a look into ports, uh, in particular,
which is the purpose of, um, of this conversation, uh, the,
the conversation can happen in isolation with the connection
with an notion in, in a land site element of a supply chain.
And it's, it's the, the, the end-to-end network view and,
and opportunity that we see.
If we were to think, um, our,
our port strategy differently mm-hmm.
The key rail infrastructure is also really important from
a sustainability point of view.
So, um, rail is our most emissions efficient, um, mode.
Um, you know, um, really efficient rail, um, going
to a consolidated port network enables larger vessels
that are also more emissions efficient.
Um, and you know, that that is an area that is very,
very high on, um, all our exporters customers,
global customers, radar.
Um, and it's also something that's very,
very high on the IMOs radar in terms of, you know, there,
there's likely additional costs, um,
coming at a global level, um, at some point, uh,
that we need to be prepared, um, to, to,
to mitigate if we wanna remain competitive globally.
So, you know, rails are really key part of that.
We would like to see more volume on rail, uh, not just, um,
you know, to both to enable consolidation,
but also having a Kiwi rail system
that's not economically sustainable.
Um, you know, if you, if you sort
of zoom out on the long term, that that doesn't feel like a,
a very resilient network for New Zealand, um,
you know, going into the future.
So, so we're absolutely supportive of, um, you know,
doing whatever we can to make sure that that is a, um,
you know, economically sustainable network.
But look, thank you. We've been told, uh,
we shouldn't be picking winners,
but, uh, we've pointed out that when the state invested,
in fact it does that when the state doesn't
invest, it doesn't do that.
Okay. Uh, thank you chair. Yeah.
So acknowledging the conversation just had about long-term
investment in a plan,
but, um, there's been a long-term conversation going on
for a long time and nothing's happened.
We're getting to a point where, um,
the capacity is reaching.
Max question for you all is, um,
I'm assuming you do a lot of export out of port of total.
Uh, would you, would your organization
or your company support an intervention, try
and move the stellar passage concealed application along
it's current, you know, it's going through a long process.
Um, would you see that as a prudent thing
that we could be doing to mitigate some
of these short-term issues that we're having
to actually enable long-term growth?
Yes, we would. Um,
and I mean, I'm not sure exactly
what you mean by intervention.
Um, uh, well, right now
We've had judicial reviews Yeah.
Come to a stop, be high core EPAs, um,
sort of screeching hole.
So would, I'm asking would you support something,
ministerial parliament committee making
recommendations, anything to move that along?
Yeah, absolutely. I think, you know, the, the to
of birth extension is, um, it's, it's fundamental to
having enough export capacity, um, out of the North island.
Um, it's fundamental to the,
to the actual ocean freight networks that operate out
of the, out of the north island, and making sure
that those are efficient, um, it's fundamental to, um,
productivity gains that we need to stay competitive.
So yeah, it's a very,
it's a very important priority within the network.
And so, question to you.
Have you had, uh, from your, your Kiwi rail partners,
your port of total partners, uh, people you work
with in shipping lines, anything, has anybody, um, uh,
in the organization or in committee said like, this needs
to go in this direction to move this along?
And could you share any of that with the committee?
Do it privately if you,
Uh, I mean, well, I mean, I think we, I I mean,
we have been publicly supporting that.
Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, I'm, uh, even based on, I'm most familiar,
uh, what we've seen there recently, uh, under Roger, Brad
and change in way that, um, the economic,
um, being able to be achieved,
but also, um, changes in relation to safety as well.
Uh, you talk a lot in your submission about efficiency
and how we're, how New Zealand works need to be working
the absolute capacity in order to be able to, to meet, um,
the targets that, but there've been a focus from your
organization individually, your groups at looking at, uh,
the types of engagement that they have there in relation
to their workforce to develop those types of returns.
Because my standing of the type of relation they had,
the unions, um, has allowed, um, uh,
a much more confident workforce in relation to health
and safety, which has been a significant concern at
and specifically in the past in Auckland.
So has that been something that, um, you
think could form a part of building
that additional capacity?
Something that you have looked at at all the,
the relationship with organized labor
and how that can be used to promote the efficiency of ports?
It's not something that we've specifically looked at.
Um, you know, obviously we're, we're, um, you know,
stay very close to, to port
and, you know, a huge fan
of the amazing work that's going on there.
Yeah. Um, uh, we don't actually ship, uh,
anything out of the Port of Auckland.
Um, all, all of the, you know, the exports
that we're managing are going through port of toga.
Um, but I think that the, you know, that the sort
of the broader point around how do you, um, you know,
make sure that you've got a skilled, capable, safe, um,
engaged workforce, um, you know, as, as absolutely, um,
um, critical across, across the country at the moment.
Um, what we see as ports are optimizing more
for cost than they are necessarily for productivity
or for that, um, you know, that, that, that, um, you know,
that long-term, um, workforce, uh, engagement, you know,
it's quite peaky, um, in terms of, um, labor requirements
and, and you know, that that is just a, the, the nature
of New Zealand, but it's, you know, I mean obviously skills
and capability are, are critical in terms of making sure
that what can be efficient.
Tracy, thank you. Um, and thank you for that answer.
It's, um, I'm based
In, um, Of course is where Ton is.
Um, and so the port is, uh, very central to a lot
of our day-to-day concerns
and our future aspirations for, um, not only the region,
but for a country.
Um, and I had a couple of quick questions.
The first one, um, is, um, in your
submission, you, um,
say privatization essentially should be off the table,
but, um, in lieu of that, which I happen to agree with,
but in lieu of that, um, what are your recommended sort
of governance models to achieve that, that
that collaboration, that cooperation that is required?
Mm-hmm. 'cause we should have a national strategy.
Um, but I think that there'll be some, um, concern that
in making advances in one area,
we have some unintended consequences in another.
And certainly looking at the competitive
or the nature of competition within ports and,
and between, um, various aspects
of the market over the years, you can see, um,
how some people have, um, done well
and some people have not done well.
Mm-hmm. Regarding, regarding that, that baseline.
So you must have thought about,
not expecting you'd have all the answers,
but, um, as an important part of the puzzle, um,
how do you envision that governance
collaborative network actually operated and who needs to be?
So maybe just tackle the point
around privatization in the first instance.
Um, we we're not necessarily, you know,
against privatization of those, those assets,
but I think, you know, um, both font
and Silver Fern Farms are cooperatives
and, you know, farmers form cooperatives
fundamentally to mitigate risk.
Mm. And so, you know, in, in being so far from the world
and you look at, you know, a huge volume, um, you know,
if your product's going through a small number of assets
that sort of rings alarm bells around, is there,
is there likely to be price risk that emerges
where you've got perishable
products that have to be shipped?
Um, and you've got that potential for that,
that hold up risk to occur when you've got a, um,
you know, small number of ac.
And so it's not that, it's not
that it's necessarily a bad thing,
and actually there's examples in the world
where it's worked incredibly well, um,
and there's, you know, there's partners that we work with
that do a phenomenal job of it around the world.
Mm-hmm. Um, however, there's other instances
where it has not worked well.
Um, and where it's been, you know, um, you know,
caused significant increases in costs without any associated
increase in productivity and some, some sort
of breakdowns in, in, in that, you know,
the efficiency of that overall network.
So it's, it's a, it's a, it's a cautious kind of, um, it's,
it's actually sort of a cautious support.
You know, New Zealand doesn't have a bottomless pit of money
to invest in, in this infrastructure,
and there's some pragmatism I think that that's necessary.
Um, but the key risk we see around that is the price risk.
And so, um, so I think we would need to be confident
that there's, um, monitoring
or, um, you know, a, a regulatory framework
or a governance framework around it that actually, um,
is driving for the right outcomes.
And so if you're thinking about, okay, well
what does the governance around a national strategy
or, you know, a nationally strategic
approach need to look like?
Um, you know, we haven't given it any sort of se, you know,
serious thought, but it would be, um, wonderful to, for that
to, you know, include, um, participants
that are both customers
and consumers of, of that infrastructure as well as,
you know, the, the investors, um, in that infrastructure.
That makes sense. Mm-hmm.
If I could just ask a quick question then, while I have you,
um, looking at Capt
and, uh, the call for some sort of review of, of, of that
or, um, relaxation.
Um, how would that affect,
do you think New Zealand's coastal operators, um,
and in particular, um, you know, those maritime jobs, health
and safety standards, all of that?
Um, it seems to me that we've never really got the best
that we could out our coastal shipping mm-hmm.
Strategy and our coastal shipping capabilities, um,
without necessarily going to a relaxation.
Mm. Drew, do you wanna pick up on that one? Yeah,
I think from, from our perspective,
we certainly acknowledge the, the needs to protect and,
and cultivate and grow the,
the seafair industry in New Zealand.
It's number of our, um, our people are on those vessels and,
and health and safety and,
and industry that grows in that space.
It's certainly important to us.
However, what we've seen in, in, in past years is the,
the open coast policy, um,
to international shipping lines is actually seen the
containerized coastal shipping
industry deteriorate quite significantly.
Mm-hmm. We only have one coastal vessel for containers, uh,
going around New Zealand, and it's actually owned
by a foreign foreign entity anyway.
So, um, what we are seeing is that,
and what we'd like is to, to, to be able
to engage in the discussion
that potentially does make changes
and protect, protects the industry as well.
There are certainly inefficiencies
and in the economics behind coastal,
coastal shipping in New Zealand that we continue to see
organizations try it and, and fail.
And, and this kind of volatility of, of moving in
and moving out, by
and large is driven by the economics that, that some
of the cabage laws do drive into that, that system.
Mm-hmm. So I think there's,
there is a discussion to be had. Um,
Do you see that as part of the overall strategy though?
Like, um, it would be a shame to
not include coastal shipping as a
New Zealand's own capabilities in coastal shipping
as a, as absolutely.
Contingent park. Yeah.
I, I think, uh, as a counterintuitive it may sound, it's,
it's part of a landside solution.
Mm-hmm. Uh, in a way is the way that we,
we connect the broader, um, value of New Zealand
exports and imports into the right supply chain networks,
whether it's through road rail or a coastal service.
Then there'll be lane ways that are more, um, more suitable
to one mode and lane ways
that will be more suitable to another model.
But, um, our view is that we're far from, uh, reaching the,
the potential that a cost a thriving coastal service would,
would deliver to New Zealand.
And just to build on that side, I think, uh, the,
the value proposition of coastal is that it, it enables
product to be fit into our, into our main hub ports
that are going out, but it's also really a real key enabler
for repositioning of the equipment up
and down the, the country and,
and helping take off some of that,
that pressure as well. So, and
Asset. Mm.
So it's, I think,
I think it's, it's not an all or nothing.
So there's, there's absolutely, uh, coastal shipping
and it's, you know, that's a very important, um, piece
of a long-term strategy.
Um, but absolutely there's, there's some consideration
around some of the current constraints around sabotage
that could hinder a a a a,
a more efficient ocean freight network in the long run.
Yeah. I suppose on where I'm coming from,
and I'm just wondering whether we've realized the potential
of coastal shipping as a means by which
to impact on the efficiencies
that you seek in the wider, in the wider sphere.
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
If you forget about it, it's a, it's a gap. Yeah.
I'm, I'm just wondering if you're able
to give any more detail on
what the constraints are in the current rules
that are problematic.
Like I looking through the written submission, but,
and it's okay if you need to come back to us,
It gets a little bit technical. Yeah. Um,
Give it, give it a whi Two, two main things is, is,
is the economics that just, just the, the cost of,
of New Zealand flag
and the New Zealand crew can, can hinder in comparison
to international Yeah.
Shipping lines that are coming through and by
and large doing the same job
by Prefe on international services.
Yeah. So they are able to do that as opposed to the,
the truly domestic services that Yeah.
That have a, a different cost model that they have to, um,
I guess is challenged by the one.
The other one is, is, is is the idea that, um, in order
to create potentially efficient hub
and spoke ocean freight services, they do sometimes need
to go back, back around.
So current, current law doesn't allow services
to to, to Right.
Go back around on itself. Okay.
And we do see, um, you know, some big hub ports requiring
that ability from, from a ocean freight perspective if we
are to, to design a hub and spoke network around that.
Hopefully that makes sense.
Yeah. So you're saying that some of the, is this,
if a ship comes in, in tower on, on its way in,
it can't also go into tower
On its way out? Correct.
Why the, the, the current legislation,
Uh, doesn't, doesn't allow it.
Okay. Right. Um, now conscious that we are roughly a quarter
of an hour to go, um, did you want some time in private
to talk about anything in private or not?
I think we're all good. I mean, We're
all good. We'll carry on if
there, there's something, if
something we can follow up on.
Okay. But can I, can I throw in a few questions then?
Um, the first one of those is just the impact
of rotations.
And we've heard a lot about the efficiency
of the reliability of the system,
and we only get 60%, you know, arrive on time,
full stop at the beginning.
And by the time they leave and
not, we haven't actually had a number.
We said, what's the, what's it, um, when they leave?
But a lot of rotation of ports say, well, we're gonna drop
that port, we're gonna drop that,
this impression we're getting.
What impact does that have on your newer,
essentially the biggest customer?
What impact does that have on you
and your, you know, your customer,
your own customers effectively?
Um, if, if a, a ship just says, well, we're not,
we're not going to, you know, pick a port,
Littleton, Wellington.
Yeah. You know, wherever, what's the impact?
So I think you know that, so in the short term, this sort
of short and long-term implications of that.
So you know that that behavior is caused by, you know,
port's competing with each other.
You know, at the moment, the way that the,
the network is set up is so, you know, you can compete
to give the lowest rate, you know, out of your port.
And so, um, you know, there are a number of operators
that will, you know, chop and change, you know, schedules
or ports depending on what's most economically,
um, efficient for them.
Um, so the short term, the short term implication is
that you get, you know, we have a lot of small services, um,
in New Zealand and, um, that, that means that instead
of getting, um, you know, reliable, um, port calls, um,
regularly, that, you know, have a, um, you know,
a straight line up to our biggest markets, you get a lot
of small vessels.
Um, so that causes congestion in ports.
Um, so I think, you know, port
of title alone's got 16 vessels a week
coming, coming through.
Um, if one of those is late,
or if there's, you know, any disruption in loading
or unloading that vessel for whatever reason, it cascades
through the network, if that were consolidated into a,
into fewer larger vessels, um,
you would have a more reliable, um, more reliable network.
And that's got a lot of benefits for exporters.
Um, being able to make commitments to your customers
and keep them, um, uh, working capital in terms
of actually how much, um, of your, uh, you know,
capital is tied up in product that's on the water for,
you know, having certainty around what is is very valuable.
Um, and reducing the amount of time
to market is also very, very valuable.
Um, but in the long term, um, you know, the long term is
that you don't have a stable network,
you don't have confidence
that the network's gonna have the right level of investment.
You don't have confidence that the land side, you know,
you end up with fragmentation on the land side or chopping
and changing between rail and road, depending on, um,
you know, so, so it actually, you know,
there's some short term, you know, arguably for some,
you know, for some exporters you could see some short term
benefits from that, you know, com competitive dynamic. It
Was more the thing of saying we actually,
we were gonna call in.
I've, I've sent all my, my, um, product to Yep.
I sent all my product to Napier
and a ship was calling it Napier,
but now it's dropped it. Yeah.
So now, so you've gotta wait for the next ship. Now
We've gotta wait for the next ship. That's
right. That can't be great.
No, and that's you. Yes. Okay, let's
Go. So just from
an next export point of view, so, um,
silver Farms, right?
So we, for us, we, we, we have a, a product that is,
is this beautiful product made here in New Zealand
that we are competing with other people
around the world with, with key markets.
Now, any delay, any inefficiency in the,
in our internal network here, as soon
as a vessel is is emitted on report,
it generates noise and it generates cost.
It, it is, uh, it, it forces us to start driving
or chasing vessels up
and down the country, which is,
which drives inefficiency in our landside networks,
which then has a ripple effect into our ports.
And alternatively, while we're competing with, uh,
other customers or other exporters from other parts
of the world into our key markets, we have promises
that we need to meet to our, our customers
and our expectations that we we're trying to deliver to.
So our, our, if, you know, if that's,
that's the sort of, uh,
insight you're looking for from a Yeah.
What, what does it mean from an exporter?
It, it, it drives noise and it drives cost
and it's, it's a it's a challenge for us. And, and
So you've literally gotta move the
containers around to the next port.
Yeah, absolutely. Right? And we have a, we have a product
that is, um, that creates and,
and creates value by its chilled nature.
And, and, and that type of product, it,
it needs a consistent, it needs a reliable field.
When we know it's coming in an AP as an example, or,
and for whatever reason there's disruption
and it moves down, that's,
that's what we're trying to avoid.
And that's, that's what we are, you know, not to leverage.
So reli reliability is crucial.
Absolutely. Absolutely. The, the highest value experts
from, from, you know, the New Zealand primary sector tend
to be very perishable.
Um, so, so unreliability in the supply chain
really undermines your ability to,
to commercialize, um, your products.
Okay. So we've heard that reliability is a real problem.
What are the things which we can do to try
and improve the reliability of the system?
You, we've got a, a number
of those things you've already said.
I mean, the tower on our investment is one clearly,
you know, but just, just walk us through if you said,
you know, three or four, five things, whatever that is,
that makes the system collectively more reliable.
I, I think it is, um, at the risk of sort of, you know,
laboring the point, I think it really is that's okay.
It, it really is around the consolidation of the network
and to, um, you know, um, a more rationalized port network
with a really efficient landside network that is
consolidating cargo through, um, you know, through
to quartz, that enables, um, you know,
a much more efficient global ocean freight models, um,
that will be more reliable and more cost effective.
Um, and, you know,
it provides certainty on the land side in terms of where
to invest, um, you know,
what volumes you likely to have in the long run.
Um, I, I, I see it as, as, as quite, yeah.
Okay. And, and there's nothing new in,
in, in that approach.
If you look at efficient, uh, countries
and supply chain networks around the world,
they all follow the same model.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. One of the things we, we heard in the last, um, uh,
in the last session from a shipping point of view was, um,
that in, in Australia, they've got, um, across Brisbane,
Melbourne, uh, Sydney, Melbourne, um,
essentially the same operators, um, operating as, you know,
with the, within the, uh, within the ports
and able the ability to be able to move labor around to, um,
to try and improve reliability thoughts on
that, that proposition.
And I know we've got different,
completely different arrangements here.
I don't think we have the scale for, for that.
And so I think when, when you don't have the scale for
that kind of model, you have to look for scale efficient,
you know, you have to look for options
that actually drive towards that scale efficiency.
Okay. You go. Um, and so, you know, you know, and,
and there's a very different set of arrangements, um,
in terms of, you know, privatized, privatized ports,
concessions for, for several different operators.
Um, that's, it's not a model I think
that New Zealand has the scale to necessarily carry.
Okay. That's useful. No, and the other one
before I go to Carlos is we've had quite a number
of comments being made about, um, uh, about the cost
of putting, whether it's trucks
or whether it's trains, um, into ports that they're now,
and you mentioned, I think, port of Auckland
and say, well, their returns gone up,
but part of that return going up is also they're charging
more at the gate effectively.
Mm-hmm. Can you just walk us through what's going on there?
What your view of that is, the charges that,
so if I've got a container, where am I getting pinged for
that container through the journey, and
what are you getting back for that?
Do those look reasonable to you?
And you did mention, you did hint on a sort
of commerce commission type
involvement in some of these things as well.
So just walk us through that.
Look, I, I, I think it comes to,
you talk specifically on a, a, um, on an exporter point
of view, but I think they, in the current construct,
I don't think you can blame port for, for,
for using a price lever
to increase their return on the capital
that's invested in those assets.
They have an accountability to their investors
and to their, you know, to their rate payers in,
in most instances, to, you know, to put that capital to a,
to a, you know, to a good use.
Um, and so, you know, nobody likes price increases,
but at the same time, within the contract construct
that we're operating in, um, it's also, you know,
it's also understandable
that the longer term point is we want, um,
the most efficient
and economically sustainable, um, network
that drives competitiveness.
And so, um, I don't think it's necessarily the fault
of any individual, um, operator.
I think it's, I think that, that that's a symptom
of the network that we're operating in if we,
but it does have a big, but, but it does have a significant
impact for, for exporters at, at the moment.
Yeah. Thank you. I, okay.
I, I won't go into the, the detail around Auckland's, um,
uh, fees and, and, and I, you know, and,
and the lever that they're trying to pull there.
But what I would say is, uh, we,
where cost has added into the supply chain,
it, it accumulatively adds up.
And, and, and ultimately at the end of it, uh, our cost
to goods sold is, is a, is a component that, um, helps us
or enables us or, or restricts us with our ability
to be competitive against, uh, you know,
product coming in from other people know, um, where we,
where, where it helps us
and make sense is where we see those, those fees
that are coming through are being reinvested back into the
productivity or, or lifting
performance, uh, in the infrastructure.
And that's, you know, no,
no problem at all when that happens.
Where, where we see costs that are, it's hard to sort of see
where the investment is coming off the back
of that, of those fees.
That's where it gets, uh, pretty challenging for us.
And, you know, up
and down the country, we have different ports
that apply different rates, uh, whether it's, um,
for automation purposes
or for proficiencies that they, they talk through
or just fees associated to handling.
And, you know, at a, at a macro level, fine,
but when we start looking through it
and seeing the, the additional kind of rework and handling
and et cetera, et cetera, that just replicates cost for us.
That's, that's where it does get pretty frustrating. Okay.
And there's no danger, Emma, in terms of, um, you,
you basically said go consolidate the pauses,
but the more you consolidate,
the more they are effectively you, you've got a,
a bigger monopoly proposition there.
There, there absolutely is.
Um, but I also think that we're, we're too small, um, to,
to, um, to accept
that scale efficiency isn't going to drive a better outcome.
So I think we actually do need
to say we actually need the scale efficiency,
but we need the mechanisms around it, um, that,
that protect against price risk.
Okay. The, the competition is in the market.
Um, you know, it's, it's probably, um, limited in the value
that it's creating, um,
when we're talking about it here at home. Yeah. Okay.
No, cool. Carlos I mentioned
Is, um, you, you can decide not
to answer if you think the question is inappropriate.
So, um, as a customer point of view,
can you rank which is the most efficient port
in New Zealand, and which one is the left Oh,
the most efficient
To you? You
have the most
You okay. Just say this one in,
in, in public.
I, I'll, I'll lean on the,
the world bank's results that just being
As, as, as a customer point of view.
Yeah. So the World Bank does say to,
is the most efficient in New Zealand, and,
and we would, we would support that.
Um, we believe, you know, this again, scale and,
and the ability to, to flow almost all
of our north island volume into, into one port
and set up long term infrastructure
and systems that support, that has certainly, uh, done,
done New Zealand customers from quite well in our view.
Um, I, I, I'll it varies on,
on, on the, on the worst.
Um, it depends what you're looking at, honest,
They, they keep a second and 13, but I,
I think that a good context for that question, um,
if I may, is that 82%
of the containerized movements in New Zealand,
that those ports are in the bottom quat tile in comparison
to, um, global, global benchmarks.
So there's, there's clearly a, a gap
or an opportunity in, in whichever way you wanna see it.
Julianne, uh, I wanted to come back to the,
the vehicle booking charges, right?
Is that what it's called? Vbcs, um, at Auckland.
And I just wanted to, it was just a small question about,
um, my understanding is they're doing a
timing differential in pricing to try
and drive more, um, spread of, you know,
so there's peak spreading.
Mm-hmm. Um, is there a reason why you don't think, um,
or have you got any in insight into why they're not
responding to that price incentive?
Like is it, or is it, like, is it possible
that it was just really underpriced for a really long time
and they're willing
to take those higher charges and not shift?
Um, we look, I, I'm not,
not quite sure how best to answer your question,
but, uh, clearly it's, it's been used to try
and influence behaviors around, uh, when, you know,
accessing outta the port and,
and, you know, later, later
evening, you know, coming through in the evening.
Now the problem is, is, um, that'll make sense, right?
But again, if you think of it from a total supply chain
perspective, uh, the,
in order to get the, the containers in
and out of the, the site isn't just at the floor,
but it's also a warehouses is that are, um, receiving
and, uh, unloading and, and, and, and doing that.
So that then means that, uh, whoever, whoever
who is receiving that, that those containers need
to have open hours, uh, later, open earlier, all that sort
of stuff, that then again, drives
additional costs into their own network.
And so all that sort of stuff just starts going through,
which ultimately means, okay, well, is somebody going
to adhere to the behavioral change of trying
to influence their operating hours to get a cheaper rate?
Yes or no? Um, I'm not too sure.
We, for us is, is as we to go
before we, we don't really export a lot out of, uh, out
of all, but it's, it's a import fee for Yeah,
true empty containers into us.
Yeah. So it's not, not affecting you as much directly.
No, but I, but I think if you, those charges, if you were
to look at the, the fees that are coming through there,
it's, it's a hockey curve, kind of a, um, you know, it's,
and, and how relevant those fees are
to other ports fees would be a,
an interesting question for you to look at as well.
Look, we've got time, um, really, really appreciate, um,
your, um, your input and answering all those questions.
Uh, there's no doubt it's probably gonna
through things for going, ah, no, hang on.
Where do we land with that? And
what, what do we think about that?
But we really appreciate that we give a different
perspective from all different parts of the industry,
which is what this is all about. So thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank the opportunity.